The Project Gutenberg EBook of Transactions of the American Society of
Civil Engineers, Vol. LXX, Dec. 1910, by John A. Bensel

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Transactions of the American Society of Civil Engineers, Vol. LXX, Dec. 1910
       Address at the 42d Annual Convention, Chicago, Illinois,
       June 21st, 1910, Paper No. 1178

Author: John A. Bensel

Release Date: July 8, 2006 [EBook #18795]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOCIETY OF CIVIL ENGINEERS ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Sigal Alon and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









AMERICAN SOCIETY OF CIVIL ENGINEERS

INSTITUTED 1852


TRANSACTIONS

Paper No. 1178


ADDRESS AT THE 42D ANNUAL CONVENTION,
CHICAGO, ILLINOIS, JUNE 21ST, 1910.

BY JOHN A. BENSEL, PRESIDENT, AM. SOC. C. E.




I know that to some of my audience a satisfactory address at a summer
convention would be like that which many people regard as a satisfactory
sermon--something soothing and convincing, to the effect that you are
not as other men are, but better. While I appreciate very fully,
however, the honor of being able to address you, I am going to look
trouble in the face in an effort to convince you that, in spite of great
individual achievements, engineers are behind other professional men in
professional spirit, and particularly in collective effort.

Whether this, if true, is due to our extreme youth as a profession, or
our extreme age, is dependent upon the point of view; but I think it is
a fact that will be admitted by all that engineers have not as yet done
much for their profession, even if they have done considerable for the
world at large.

Looking backward, our calling may properly be considered the oldest in
the world. It is older, in fact, than history itself, for man did not
begin to separate from the main part of animal creation, until he began
to direct the sources of power in Nature for the benefit, if not always
for the improvement, of his particular kind. In Bible history, we find
early mention of the first builder of a pontoon. This creditable
performance is especially noted, and the name of the party principally
concerned prominently mentioned. The same thing cannot be said of the
unsuccessful attempt at the building of the first sky-scraper, for here
the architect, with unusual modesty, has not given history his name,
this omission being possibly due to the fact that the building was
unsuccessful. If an engineer was employed on this particular
undertaking, the architect had, even at that early stage of his
profession, learned the lesson of keeping all except his own end of the
work in the background.

The distinctive naming of our profession does not seem, however, to go
back any farther than the period of 1761, when that Father of the
Profession, John Smeaton, first made use of the term, "engineer," and
later, "civil engineer," applying it both to others and to himself, as
descriptive of a certain class of men working along professional lines
now existing and described by that term.

Remarkable progress has certainly been made in actual achievements since
that time, and I know of nothing more impressive than to contemplate the
tremendous changes that have been made in the material world by the
achievements of engineers, particularly in the last hundred years. This
was forcibly impressed upon me a short time ago, while in the company of
the late Charles Haswell, then the oldest member of this Society, who,
seeing one of the recently built men-of-war coming up the harbor,
remarked that he had designed the first steamship for the United States
Navy. The evolution of this intricate mass of mechanism, which, from the
very beginning of its departure from the sailing type of vessel, has
taken place entirely within the working period of one man's life, is as
graphic a showing of engineering activity as I think can be found.

Our activities are forcibly shown in many other lines of invention and
in the utilization of the forces of Nature, particularly in the
development of this country. We, although young in years, have become
the greatest railroad builders in history, and have put into use
mechanical machines like the harvester, the sewing machine, the
telephone, the wireless telegraph, and almost numberless applications of
electricity. Ships have been built of late years greatly departing from
those immediately preceding them, so that at the present time they might
be compared to floating cities with nearly all a city's conveniences and
comforts. We have done away with the former isolation of the largest
city in the country, and have made it a part of the main land by the
building of tunnels and bridges. In all our work it might be said that
we are hastening, with feverish energy, from one problem to another,
for the so-called purpose of saving time, or for the enjoyment of some
new sensation; and we have also made possible the creation of that which
might be deemed of doubtful benefit to the human race, that huge
conglomerate, the modern city.

There has been no hesitancy in grappling with the problems of Nature by
engineers, but they seem to be diffident and neglectful of human nature
in their calculations, leaving it out of their equations, greatly to
their own detriment and the world's loss. We can say that matters
outside of the known are not our concern, and we can look with pride at
our individual achievements, and of course, if this satisfies, there is
nothing more to be said. But it is because I feel that engineers of
to-day are not satisfied with their position, that I wonder whether we
have either fulfilled our obligations to the community, or secured
proper recognition from it; whether, in fact, the engineer can become
the force that he should be, until he brings something into his
equations besides frozen figures, however diverting an occupation this
may be.

One may wonder whether this state of affairs is caused from a fear of
injecting uncertain elements into our calculations, or whether it is our
education or training which makes us conservative to the point of
operating to our own disadvantage. We may read the requirements of our
membership and learn from them that in our accomplishments we are not to
be measured as skilled artisans, but the fact remains that, to a great
extent, society at large does so rate us, and it would seem that we must
ourselves be responsible for this state of affairs. Our colleges and
technical schools are partly to blame for the existence of this idea, on
account of the different degrees which they give. We have a degree of
civil engineer, regarded in its narrowest sense, of mining engineer,
mechanical engineer, electrical engineer, and by necessity it would seem
as if we should shortly add some particular title to designate the
engineer who flies. In reality there should be but two classes of
engineers, and the distinction should be drawn only between civil
engineers and military engineers. As a matter of fact, fate and
inclination determine the specialty that a man takes up after his
preliminary training, and so far as the degrees are concerned, the only
one that has any right to carry weight, because it is a measure of
accomplishment, is that which is granted by this Society to its
corporate members. The schools, in their general mix-up of titles,
certainly befog the public mind. It is as if the medical schools, for
instance, should issue degrees at graduation for brain doctors, stomach
doctors, eye and ear doctors, etc. Very wisely, it seems to me, the
medical profession and the legal profession, with histories far older
than ours, and with as wide variations in practice as we have, leave the
variations in name to the individual taste of the practitioner, in a
manner which we would do well to copy. The Society itself has adopted
very broad lines in admission to membership, classing as civil engineers
all who are properly such; and there is good reason for the serious
consideration of the term at this time, as we cannot fail to recognize a
tendency in State and other governments to legislate as to the right to
practice engineering. It was owing to the introduction of a bill
limiting and prescribing the right to practice in the State of New York,
that a committee was recently appointed to look into this matter and
report to the Society. This report will be before you for action at this
meeting.

As to the manner in which engineers individually perform their work, no
criticism would properly lie, and in fact it is fortunate that our work
speaks for itself, for, as a body, we say nothing. We are no longer,
however, found working for the greater part of the time on the outskirts
of civilization, and it becomes necessary, therefore, for us to change
with changing conditions, and to use our Society not only for the
benefit of the profession as a whole, but for the benefit of the members
individually. Whether one of our first steps in this direction should be
along legislative lines is for you to determine. For myself, having been
confronted with legislation recently attempted in New York, I am
convinced that we shall have legislation affecting our members, and this
legislation should properly be moulded by some responsible body like our
own Society. If we do not take the matter up ourselves it is likely to
be taken up by other associations, and from past experience, it would
seem as though it might be carried on along lines that would tend to
ridicule our desire for professional standing.

The Society is to be congratulated on its present satisfactory status.
The reports show a very satisfactory financial condition, and you may
note a continuing increase in membership that is extremely gratifying.
This, after having nearly doubled in the last seven years, still shows
no sign of diminishing in its rate of increase. It may be said, also,
that we have in the Society an excellent publishing house, where the
members have an opportunity to secure technical papers published in the
highest style of the art. We have in general in the officers, a number
of men, who, within the prescribed limits, labor for the benefit of the
members, but we also have constitutional limitations to the activity of
our governing body, so that the voice of the Society is never heard, or,
at least, might be compared to that still, small voice we call
"conscience," which is not audible outside of the body that possesses
it.

Now, in these days, when the statement that two and two make four is
accepted from its latest originator as a newly discovered truth, a
little extension of our mathematics, to take into our estimate people as
well as things, is what we principally need, and it would be a good
thing, regarded either from the point of view of what the world needs or
the more selfish view of our own particular gains. At the present time
it would seem as though our world had thrown away the old gods without
taking hold of any new ones. Private ownership as it formerly existed is
no longer recognized; individual action in almost any large field is
to-day hampered and curtailed in a manner undreamed of twenty years ago.
In fact, our whole scheme of government seems to be passing from the
representative form on which it was founded, to some new form as yet
undetermined. Whether all this is, in our opinion, for good or for evil,
is of no particular concern. The matter that concerns us is, that we
have left our old moorings, and that, to secure new ones, new limits are
to be set to the activities of men along lines which concern us, and
that, therefore, it is necessary that those who by education and
training are best fitted to consider facts and not desires, should guide
society as much as possible along its new lines. I consider that we as a
profession are particularly trained to do this by our consideration of
facts as they exist, and I think it will be recognized by all that we
are not in our work or activities bound by any precedent, even if we do
learn all that we can from the past; and that we are by nature and
training of a cool and calculating disposition, which is surely a thing
that is needed in this time of many suggested experiments.

To be effective, however, we must be cohesive, and thus be able to take
our part not as the led, but as leaders, convincing the people, if
possible, that all the ills of our social system cannot be cured by
remedies which neglect the forces of creation, and that the best doctors
for our troubles are not necessarily those whose sympathies are most
audibly expressed.

In the recent discoveries of science our ideas as to the forces of
Nature must be greatly enlarged and our theories amplified. Recent
discovery of radium and radio-active substances shows at least that much
of our old knowledge needs re-writing along the lines of our greater
knowledge of to-day.

With this increase of knowledge it would seem as though those who devote
their lives to the exploitation of natural forces should take a position
in the future even more prominent than in the past, and it will
undoubtedly become our function to help the world to that ideal state
described by our greatest living poet of action, when he speaks of the
time to come, as follows:

    "And no one shall work for money,
      And no one shall work for fame;
    But each for the joy of working,
      And each in his separate star;
    Shall draw the thing as he sees it,
      For the God of the things as they are."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Transactions of the American Society
of Civil Engineers, Vol. LXX, Dec. 1910, by John A. Bensel

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOCIETY OF CIVIL ENGINEERS ***

***** This file should be named 18795.txt or 18795.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/7/9/18795/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Sigal Alon and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
