The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Girl's Cabinet of Instructive and Moral
Stories, by Uncle Philip


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: The Girl's Cabinet of Instructive and Moral Stories

Author: Uncle Philip

Release Date: February 2, 2004  [eBook #10915]

Language: English

Character set encoding: US-ASCII


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GIRL'S CABINET OF INSTRUCTIVE
AND MORAL STORIES***


E-text prepared by Internet Archive, University of Florida; David Garcia,
and the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 10915-h.htm or 10915-h.zip:
      (http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/1/0/9/1/10915/10915-h/10915-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/1/0/9/1/10915/10915-h.zip)
      
      Actual images of the pages of the original book are available
      through the Florida Board of Education, Division of Colleges
      and Universities, PALMM Project, 2001 (Preservation and Access
      for American and British Children's Literature, 1850-1869).
      See
      http://purl.fcla.edu/fcla/dl/uf00000422.jpg
      or
      http://purl.fcla.edu/fcla/dl/uf00000422.pdf




THE GIRL'S CABINET OF INSTRUCTIVE AND MORAL STORIES

BY UNCLE PHILIP.

NEW YORK:
PHILIP J. COZANS, PUBLISHER,
No. 107 NASSAU STREET
1856.




[Illustration: Front Cover]




[Illustration: A Doll's Party.]

A DOLL'S PARTY.


Here is a Doll's party. All the little girls of the vicinity who have
Dolls, have assembled in order to give their little favorites a nice
party. You see they all have Dolls. They are good girls. They are very
obedient. They attend school regularly, and as they are well-behaved
girls, Santa Claus left each of them a Doll at Christmas time. They have
learned their lessons for to-morrow, as their mothers have told them,
that duty before pleasure is the good girl's motto. They will play
sometimes with their Dolls. Will settle on some new Doll dresses, and
then bidding each other a kind good night they will return home to
sleep. As God is the protector of all good girls, each will say a
little prayer to Him before she goes to bed.



[Illustration: The Vain Girl.]

THE VAIN GIRL.


Many years ago there lived in one of the New England States, a fine
family, composed of father, mother, and six children. The children were
all good, and kind, and industrious, except one. Kate never would do as
she was bid. She was in every sense, a disobedient child. She gave her
parents much pain and trouble. She was what is called a vain girl. You
all know what a vain girl is. A vain girl, is one who attends more to
her dress and toilet, than to her books. Kate's father was going to New
York some time before Christmas--he told the girls, that if they were
good, kind and obedient while he was gone, he would bring them each a
pretty Album. They all promised to do just as their mother should wish.
The father went to New York and returned. The day after his return they
reminded him of his promise. He went to his desk and said, "Here they
are, but you want me to paint some flowers in them, well Ellen what do
you wish?" Ellen said, "a lily Pa, if you please." Julia chose a tulip,
and Lizzie a rose. Kate was silent, and her father asked her--"Well Kate
what shall I paint for you?" She hesitated, but finally said, "I would
prefer a portrait of myself." "Very well Kate," said her father, but at
the same time a sneer might have been seen on his curled lip. A few
evenings after, when there was a large party in the parlor--the father
gave each of the girls their Albums. Every one was pleased except Kate,
who burst into tears, and tossing the book on the floor, left the room.
The Album was picked up and there was a portrait of Kate just as she had
desired, but beneath it was written, "The flower most admired by Kate."

It was a severe lesson--but let all vain girls profit by it.




[Illustration: Lizzie and Fashion.]

LIZZIE AND FASHION.


Lizzie is taking a ride on her pet Fashion. She is not afraid of
falling, for she can ride very well. Fashion seems proud to feel
such a nice little burden on his back. See how he capers and prances.
He knows Lizzie will not fall, and so he amuses himself and her, by
jumping about. Lizzie rides every morning and evening. She is delicate,
and so her Pa bought her a fine horse. She rides out alone. She is not
pretty--but she is happy and good natured. When the other girls see her
riding they sneer at her and say, "There goes ugly Liz on the pretty
horse." The girls are silly and thoughtless. They should reflect that
a happy face looks much more agreeable than a handsome one.

As soon as Lizzie has said her prayers in the morning, she goes out on
her horse. She rides some miles and then returns to breakfast. As she is
delicate, she does not go to school, but studies under her mother. She
studies hard, and is very obedient. After dinner she goes out again and
rides for two or three hours. It is pleasant to see how Fashion loves
her. As soon as she appears at the door--he is impatient of restraint,
and wishes to rush to her. When she has been riding, and returned, and
he is going to the stable, he will turn frequently to see her as she
goes along the piazza. She has learned him many tricks. He stands up
on his hind legs. He will dance: in fact, he will do almost anything
she will command him. She has accomplished it all by kindness and a
smiling face.




[Illustration: Eva's Pet.]

EVA'S PET.


You know what a pleasure it is to have a pretty pet Dog. I do not mean
those little lap dogs. They are of no use, and when I see a little girl
with a lap dog, I always say, "Well, well, that little girl is, and
always will be foolish." And why do I say so? Because I know she will
neglect her books and her other duties just to play with Flora. If you
want a good pet dog--get a large one. The best dogs are the St. Bernard
or Newfoundland. They are very large. They are jet black. They are very
intelligent, and after you have had them for some time, you can make
them perform many tricks for the amusement of your little friends. The
St. Bernard Dog is a native of the Alps. He is named after a convent on
Mount St. Bernard in Switzerland. The convent is 8,038 feet above the
foot of the mountain. It is a Benedictine monastery and hospital, and is
the highest inhabited spot in Europe. Travellers passing the Alps into
Italy have to pass over the mountains. They are covered with snow and
very dangerous. The good monks go out with their dogs and if they find
any traveller benighted or frozen in the snow, they lend him succour and
take him to the monastery. The dogs are very strong and can carry a man.
They are all good water dogs, and if you were to fall in the water, one
of them could hold you up until rescued by your friends. Growler is
waiting for his breakfast. He is Eva's pet. After she has eaten her
breakfast, she will give him his. See how quiet and submissive he looks.
He is a good dog.




[Illustration: Rescue of Eva.]

RESCUE OF EVA.


Eva's parents live in the South. Her father was a Planter. Their house
was but a short distance from the river. Eva and her pet dog Growler
used to romp up and down on the sandy shore of the river. One day Eva
and Growler went to the water as usual. Eva saw a boat there and thought
she would get in, but not untie the rope. She had not been in the boat
very long, when she felt it moving off--she was frightened and did not
know what to do. Growler rushed into the water, and continued to bark
very loud. As Eva saw the boat getting away out into the river, she
jumped out and with an oar commenced to swim for the shore. Growler took
hold of her dress, and was taking her ashore, when an old slave named
Sam, rushed into the water and taking her from the faithful dog, bore
her in safety to the land. She lay sick for some time and she had a
horrid fever for many days. Growler was always by her bed side, and
would only leave it to get something to eat. Eva's father gave Sam his
freedom and a purse of gold. Sam would not leave his master--"No--no,
Sambo no leave Massa and Eva--Sambo lub Massa," said the good old man.

Growler still continues in the family, and he is beloved by all--for
had it not been for him Eva would have been drowned. You see him in the
water; poor fellow he was tired--but he struggled on and was successful.




[Illustration: The Girl's Party.]

THE GIRLS PARTY.


This is a girls party. All the young ladies and gentlemen are assembled
to celebrate the birth day of Kate. They are playing one of the games of
Forfeits. Kate is on her knees. I will explain the game to you. It is a
nice game; so when you get a party of boys and girls together, you can
play it. There are various kinds of games of Forfeits; they are almost
as various as the forfeits themselves. The manner of conducting them is
the same for all. Some play is settled on, such as the "Arbor of love;"
"Spinning the plate," or any other. When all the ladies and gentlemen
have had to give various forfeits, the work of redeeming them commences.

A lady sits down and a gentleman blindfolded kneels at her feet. She
takes up each article separately, and asks for judgment. The gentleman
then tells what the owner of the forfeit must do, in order to redeem
it. The sentence once passed is never revoked, and so the sooner the
punishment is performed the better. The game waits until the culprit
performs his sentence.

In the party you see, they have been playing a game of forfeits and
sentence is being passed upon all those, who have been unfortunate
enough to have had them to pay. Kate, without not knowing it, has just
sentenced herself to kiss all the gentlemen in the room, but as there
are only two, it will be an easy task.




[Illustration: The Dispensary.]

THE DISPENSARY.


The Dispensary. What is a dispensary? The Dispensary is a room or house
in which medicines and drugs are compounded and dispensed. In all large
cities there are dispensaries where the poor people go and have their
ailments attended to for nothing. When any poor man or woman meets with
an accident he or she, is taken to the hospital where they receive
the best of care. In all boarding schools there is a room near the
Infirmary, where they keep the medicines. In the picture is a little
girl who has just entered the boarding school, and she is looking around
the buildings. She has come down to the Infirmary to see all the sick
girls, and to amuse them. She has stopped at the Dispensary, and as she
never was in one before, the good lady is explaining all the medicines.
She answers all her questions, and translates the name of the drugs for
her. She is a kind old lady, and Mary has promised to go down and see
her often, as she wishes to learn all she can about drugs.

Mary pointed to a large black bottle and asked if there was wine in it.
"Oh no, but vitriol, it burns awful and is very dangerous," said the
old lady. Mary did not wish to hear more, but rushed out of the room,
fearing the bottle would explode. She told the old lady that she never
would touch anything unless she knew what it was--and then she would
not "burn her fingers."




[Illustration: The May Queen.]

THE MAY QUEEN.


It is May morning. May is the most beautiful of all months. Then it is,
that all nature seems to awaken from its winter slumbers. The grass
springs up, the little birds sing and chirp, and display their beautiful
plumage. The trees shoot forth their buds, the fruitful covering of
future foliage. We no longer greet each other in the warmed room, but,
"Good morning," is sweetly spoken from the open window, or among the
bushes of the garden. We hunt flowers and climb hills, and thus exercise
both the body and the mind. In many parts of Europe, on the first of
May, all the juveniles of both sexes, walk to a neighboring wood, and
breaking limbs off trees, adorn them with ribbons and crowns of flowers.
They are accompanied by a band of music and the blowing of horns. They
then return to their homes and make their houses triumphant in the
flowery spoils. In the afternoon, a May pole is erected in the centre
of the village. The pole is consecrated to the goddess of flowers, and
is profusely adorned with them. It remains standing all the year.

The young girls then select by lot, one of their number to be crowned
as May Queen. She is crowned with a beautiful wreath of flowers and
presides for the rest of the day over the amusements of her subjects.
In the picture you see the May pole--the Queen, the crowner, and her
two maids of honor.




[Illustration: Strawberries.]

STRAWBERRIES.


Who does not like Strawberries? They are the most delicious of all
berries. They are to be found growing in a wild state in almost all
temperate climates. During the past few years, the consumption of the
strawberry has become so enormous, as to make it a profitable berry to
cultivate. Jane Smith has been cultivating some berries, not for the
market, but for her own use. She has her two sisters in the garden, and
is showing them her nice beds. You see the kind of place she has chosen
for her beds. Shaded and dark situations under the drip of trees, are
unfavorable for the fruit. You should always choose an open, airy and
warm exposure. The seeds should be sown in the spring, in a bed of light
rich mould. You must be careful and not allow the weeds to grow up with
your plants, as they will be sure to kill them. The plants do not bear
the first season, but produce well the second. The plant never bears
fruit but once, and is then turned down to make room for a new crop. You
must plant your seeds in rows, and do not plant any thing else between
the rows. The rows should be from nine to twelve inches apart. You must
not think this a great trouble, for you know how delicious they are; one
or two saucers of good berries and cream, will amply repay all trouble.




[Illustration: Going Alone.]

GOING ALONE.


Here is a lady showing her husband, how she has taught little Lizzie to
go alone. Lizzie is only fourteen months old, and can walk across the
room alone. She does not walk but runs. It is amusing to see her. She
will crawl to the side of the room, then stand up, and after balancing
herself for a moment, she will run towards her mother. See how delighted
they all seem. The father is pleased, to see his little girl walk, for
then, he can soon take her out with him in his walks. You know that it
is said we must all "creep before we walk," well, I will illustrate this
for you by a nice story. "Many centuries ago, there reigned over Thebes,
Laius and Iocasta. Laius was one day killed on the road as he was airing
himself in his chariot. Shortly after, a terrible plague broke out in
Thebes, and the Sphinx ravaged all the neighborhood. The Sphinx gave out
that the plague would cease and his ravages be ended, when this riddle
was solved:--'What animal walks on four feet in the morning, two at noon
day, and three in the evening.' None of the wise men could solve it, and
so their misfortune continued. At length, Iocasta the Queen, said that
whoever could solve the riddle, should be king and have her hand in
marriage. One Oedipsus hearing of the offer, and having been insulted in
Corinth, went to Thebes, and thus rendered the solution of the riddle.
'The animal,' he said, 'was man. In his infancy, the morning of life, he
walks on hands and feet: at manhood, the noon-day of life, he walks on
his feet alone: in old age, the evening of life, he walks with a stick.'
Oedipsus was married to Iocasta and reigned as King."




[Illustration: The Ill Natured Girl.]

THE ILL NATURED GIRL.


Here is a representation of an ill natured little girl. See what an
angry and unpleasant expression her countenance has assumed. She is
angry at her sister and is tearing up a note, sent to her sister by her
grandmother. I will tell you the story. The grandmother of those three
children, was on a visit to the house. She had observed how violent and
overbearing Susan was, and how properly her sister Annie behaved. Annie
was of a gentle, mild, and willing disposition. If Susan's brother
should happen to take up her book, she would immediately scream out in a
sharp tone, "let my book alone." If her brother should attempt to reply,
she would snappishly retort, "I don't care, you shall not meddle with
it." Her conduct towards Annie was just the same, in fact, she more than
once answered her grandmother in such a tart and abrupt manner, that her
mother whipped her for it.

A few days after the grandmother had left, there was a package came
for--"Miss Annie." It proved to be a most beautiful writing desk, made
of rosewood, inlaid with mother-of-pearl. It was filled with fine paper,
pens, wafers, sealing wax, and a nice seal. It contained a note in these
words:--"This present is for a little girl who knows how to keep her
temper. From her affectionate grandmother." Susan was so angry that she
snatched the paper and tore it into pieces. The lesson will do her good.




[Illustration: Lizzie's Pet.]

LIZZIE'S PET.


Lizzie is showing her grandfather her pet bird. Her grandfather has the
gout, and cannot walk. He has to keep his foot resting on a stool, and
all the amusement he has, is derived from Lizzie and her pet bird. It
is a Canary. She has a nice blue ribbon fastened to its foot so that
it cannot fly away. It is eating a cherry from the hands of the old
gentleman. The Canary bird is the most charming of all singing birds.
They can be tamed and when so, are very playful and full of capers. I
will tell you some of their tricks. Some years ago, there was an Italian
gentleman exhibiting some funny birds in New York. I went to see him and
his birds. One Canary jumped on the back of a crow and rode him around
the room. Another Canary bird stood on the barrel of a pistol, when his
master discharged it, without stirring at the report. The master then
suspended a ring from the ceiling to within a few feet of the floor. The
ring was surrounded with pitch and on fire. At his bidding, four or five
of the birds would fly through the ring, without burning their feathers.
He harnessed one to a little wagon and made him draw it around the
table. I was highly amused, and determined to buy a nice Canary and
learn it some tricks.

I am saving my pennies, and will soon have a pet like Lizzie's.





[Illustration: Back Cover]



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GIRL'S CABINET OF INSTRUCTIVE
AND MORAL STORIES***


******* This file should be named 10915.txt or 10915.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/9/1/10915


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***
