The Project Gutenberg EBook of Highway Transport Commitee Council of
National Defence, Bulletins 1, by US Government

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Highway Transport Commitee Council of National Defence, Bulletin 1
       Return-Loads Bureaus To Save Waste In Transportation

Author: US Government

Release Date: July 20, 2006 [EBook #18878]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HIGHWAY TRANSPORT COMMITEE ***




Produced by Jason Isbell and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





APRIL 2, 1918                                           BULLETIN NO. 1

RETURN-LOADS BUREAUS
TO SAVE WASTE IN TRANSPORTATION

HIGHWAYS TRANSPORT COMMITTEE
COUNCIL OF NATIONAL DEFENSE
WASHINGTON, D. C.

RESOLUTION PASSED BY THE COUNCIL OF NATIONAL DEFENSE.

_"The Council of National Defense approves the widest possible use of
the motor truck as a transportation agency, and requests the State
Councils of Defense and other State authorities to take all necessary
steps to facilitate such means of transportation, removing any
regulations that tend to restrict and discourage such use."_

WASHINGTON
GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
1918




COUNCIL OF NATIONAL DEFENSE.
HIGHWAYS TRANSPORT COMMITTEE.
WASHINGTON, D. C.





RETURN-LOAD BUREAUS TO SAVE WASTE IN TRANSPORTATION.


RELIEF FROM RAILROAD DELAYS AND EMBARGOES.

Through the cooperation of State Councils of Defense, Chambers of
Commerce, local War Boards, and Motor Clubs, the Council of National
Defense, through its Highways Transport Committee and its State Councils
Section is building up a system for more efficient utilization of the
highways of the country as a means of affording merchants and
manufacturers relief from railroad embargoes and delays due to freight
congestion.

This system already is in successful operation in Connecticut and is
being extended throughout the country.

The purpose is to take some of the burden of the short haul off the
railroads and put it on motor trucks operating over the highways. Very
considerable quantities of merchandise and materials of all kinds are
now being carried by trucks operated by private concerns in their own
businesses and by motor express and haulage companies. In a majority of
cases, however, these trucks, after delivering a load, return empty,
whereas there are shippers who would be glad to avail themselves of the
opportunity to send a load back on such a truck to its home town if they
knew it was going back empty. On the other hand, the truck owner would
be equally glad to secure a return load because the charge made for
hauling it would reduce his own haulage cost.

To bring the shipper and truck owner together serves the interests of
both. It doubles the efficiency of the motor truck, enables business men
to make prompt shipments or secure deliveries in a day instead of
several, relieves the railroads of much short-haul freight, and thereby
releases cars for necessary long-distance haulage of munitions,
equipment, and other supplies for our Army in France, and for
foodstuffs, fuel, etc., for the civilian population at home.


CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE BRING SHIPPER AND TRUCK OWNER TOGETHER.

The logical agency for bringing the two interests together is the local
business men's organization in each locality--the Chamber of Commerce,
Board of Trade, or by whatever name it is known. They are in direct
touch with the manufacturers and merchants in their respective
communities, they know the present difficulties of shipping and they
have the facilities for most quickly and systematically putting the
shipper in touch with the man who has the facility for haulage.

The method of doing this is by the establishment of a Return-Loads
Bureau--an information department that acts as a clearing house for this
particular purpose. Once initiated, the work of such a bureau can, in
most cities, be carried on by a single employee of the Chamber, probably
in addition to his other duties. If necessary or desirable, a small
charge can be made to the truck owner or the shipper for the service to
cover whatever expense may be involved in starting and maintaining the
bureau. But the plan affords an opportunity to be of such additional
service to members of the organization and to business interests of the
city generally that the increased support which may be gained through it
should offset the cost incurred. Apart from this is the opportunity it
presents to be of patriotic service to our country by increasing its
transportation facilities at a time when the safety of the Nation
depends absolutely upon transportation.

Shortage of railroad cars and locomotives created a shortage of coal
during the winter. Lack of coal slowed down production of steel, which
in turn delayed ship construction. Insufficient coal for bunkering ships
created a critical congestion of freight in Atlantic port terminals and
in railroad yards hundreds of miles inland. A certain part of this
congestion was due to short-haul shipments of freight within cities and
originating in near-by points, 10, 20, or 50 miles from the cities. Much
of this short-haul freight can be carried on the highways by motor
trucks. It can be picked up at the door of the shipper and delivered at
the door of the consignee, entailing only two handlings. It can be
delivered the same day it is shipped, whereas the same shipment by rail
would require several days if not a week or more. And the shipment can
go forward by motor when a rail freight and express embargo precludes
shipment by rail at all.


DEPENDABILITY OF MOTOR-TRUCK HAULAGE PROVEN.

The practicability and dependability of motor-truck haulage not only
within cities but between neighboring cities have been demonstrated
fully. Hundreds of local and intercity motor express lines are in
successful operation in widely scattered sections of the country. The
Return-Load Bureau system has been installed in England, where it is now
considered unpatriotic to run a truck without a load. Manchester,
England, for example, and all the surrounding cities have their
Return-Load Bureaus and have reciprocal arrangements whereby they
exchange information regarding available trucks and loads. Consequently,
any Chamber of Commerce in a city whose merchants are adversely affected
by rail embargoes and delays, freight congestion, or lack of sufficient
and direct rail transportation, and where there is any considerable
number of motor trucks, will not be embarking upon a doubtful experiment
in establishing such a bureau.


NO RESPONSIBILITY ASSUMED.

A Return-loads Bureau can be established by a Chamber of Commerce
without creating any legal liability to the shipper or assuming any
other responsibility. The function pure and simple is to advise the
shipper where and when a truck can be obtained to haul his goods and to
advise the truck owner where a load can be obtained. It has been found
in England that very often, when such a relationship has been
established between the shipper and the truck owner, an arrangement is
made between them for regular service, and they do not need to call on
the bureau for further assistance, thus lightening the work to be
performed by the Chamber.

It is left entirely to the shipper and the truck operator to make their
own agreement as to the rate to be paid for haulage, liability of the
truck owner or driver for safety of the goods in transit, and so forth.
It is expected, however, that the Chamber of Commerce will exercise
reasonable judgment and precaution, inquiring into the reliability of
truck drivers and endeavoring to correct any abuses that may arise.


HOW TO START A RETURN-LOADS BUREAU.

No difficulty and no great amount of work are involved in establishing a
Return-Loads Bureau. All that is necessary is to follow the example of
Connecticut where through the initiative of the State Council of
Defense, Return-Loads Bureaus have been established in 15 cities. The
Council addressed letters to the Chambers of Commerce, inviting their
cooperation in the movement. Return post cards were printed and mailed
to motor-truck owners in the different cities. On the reverse side of
the cards was a brief questionnaire to be filled out by the truck owner
stating whether or not he would carry "back loads" for reasonable
compensation, whether he would rent his truck at full capacity or
partial capacity, number of trucks owned, number of hours a day or days
a week the truck would be available under the return-loads plan, its
capacity in tons, etc. As these reply cards came back, they were filed
in a 3 by 5 card index drawer, arranged by cities and by routes out of
the respective cities. It developed from this canvass that there were in
the 15 cities more than 700 trucks of 1-ton capacity or more available
for such service and that they operated over 49 main routes.

Names and addresses of truck owners may be obtained from the automobile
registration bureau in the office of the secretary of state or the
commissioner of motor vehicles, as the case may be.


DUPLICATE RECORDS IN NEIGHBORING CITIES.

Duplicates of this master file were furnished by the State Council of
Defense in Connecticut to the Chamber of Commerce in each of the 15
cities, together with a map showing the location of each Return-Loads
Bureau and all of the truck routes, numbered serially. Thus, the head of
the bureau in each city knows just what trucks are available in the
other cities and the routes over which they operate.

It is desirable that the State Council of Defense, where one exists,
should indorse this movement, but it is not necessary that the Chamber
of Commerce in any city should wait for it to do so. It is perfectly
feasible for the Chamber to initiate the work itself in its own
community and then propose to similar chambers in neighboring cities to
do likewise and establish an exchange of information.

Having ascertained what trucks are available for hauling, the next move
is for the Return-Loads Bureau to circularize the merchants,
manufacturers, and other business enterprises in the community, advising
them of the establishment of the bureau and asking them to report to it
whenever they have any goods or materials which they wish to have
hauled, either within the city or to near-by cities or villages. These
reports may be made by telephone or on postal cards. Blank cards of a
size (as 3 by 5 inches) suitable for filing may be supplied to shippers
in quantity by the bureau for the purpose.


LIST RETURN-LOADS BUREAU IN TELEPHONE DIRECTORY.

The telephone company should be asked to list the Return-Loads Bureau
under the title "Return Loads" in the local directory and truck owners
and shippers be notified that by calling "Return Loads" or the telephone
number of the bureau they can learn where a load may be obtained to
carry back to the city from which the truck brought a load or where a
truck can be obtained to carry the goods the shipper desires delivered.

Publicity should be given in all the local newspapers and in those of
neighboring cities of the establishment of the bureau, so that all
interests may immediately begin making use of the facilities afforded.

It will be found that there are two classes of business to be handled by
the bureau--regular and irregular. In many cities there are motor
express lines operating on daily schedule over regular routes and there
are shippers who have regular shipments to make. Having brought these
together once, further service of the bureau will be unnecessary so far
as these particular parties are concerned. Then there are many
companies, firms or individuals that own trucks which they use only in
their own business but which stand idle part of the time or which from
time to time deliver a load in a neighboring city and return home empty.
There are also shippers who have depended on the railroad but in
emergency wish to make a quick shipment. It will be necessary to keep a
daily record of these and cross off the truck or the shipment as soon as
it is learned that the truck has gone back to its home city and is no
longer available or the shipment has been completed.


INTERCHANGE INFORMATION ON IRREGULAR WORK.

A system of daily interchange of information regarding this irregular
service should be arranged with bureaus in other cities, so that a truck
operator in Hartford, for example, who has a load to haul to New Haven
can learn from the bureau in Hartford before starting where and on what
day or at what time he can secure a load in New Haven to take back to
Hartford. He may find that by delaying his own shipment a day or by
making it a day earlier he can get a return load, whereas otherwise he
might have to return light. Shippers, therefore, should be urged to give
as much advance notice as possible of shipments they wish to make.

Within a short time this system will extend to long distances. Recently
a company in New York called up the Chamber of Commerce (before any
Return-Loads Bureau was established there) and stated it intended to
send a motor truck to Vermont to bring back some machinery and wanted to
know where a load could be secured to take to Vermont or at least a
considerable part of the way. Another company called up and said it had
a truck coming from Philadelphia with a load and wanted to get a load
going back. Motor express lines are already operating on daily schedule
between New York and Philadelphia, between Hartford and New York, and
between Boston and Hartford.

It is the purpose of the Highways Transport Committee to bring about,
just as quickly as possible, the organization of Return-Loads Bureaus in
all the cities where it will be beneficial and to establish reciprocal
relations among them on the plan of the Connecticut system.


SECURE COOPERATION OF MOTOR-TRUCK DEALERS.

Motor-truck dealers can be of great assistance to the Chambers of
Commerce in promoting this movement and in helping to get the bureaus
started. They are in direct touch with truck owners, know the routes
over which trucks are operated, condition of the roads, railroad
shipping difficulties, etc. It is recommended that the Chambers of
Commerce call on them to appoint a representative committee from among
them to cooperate with it. They can furnish a great deal of useful
information and will be a valuable factor in disseminating information
regarding the work of the bureau and making it 100 per cent useful.




(Copy of a bulletin is reprinted below, which was issued to its members
by the Chamber of Commerce of the United States, Riggs Building,
Washington, D. C.)

MOTOR-TRUCK TRANSPORTATION.

RETURN-LOAD BUREAU.


The motor truck is a part of the transportation equipment in every
community. Its use more nearly to capacity will help solve local
problems.

More complete use means loads both ways. A motor truck usually carries a
good load to its destination, whether the destination is in the same
community or in another city. Too often, however, the truck makes the
return trip with no load. Every time this occurs there is waste of at
least half the capacity of a truck to do work in transportation.

Owners of trucks do not wish half the earning power of their vehicles to
be lost. Manufacturers and merchants with goods piled up and awaiting
shipment do not like to see empty trucks pass their doors. Both need a
local clearing house for information about the trucks that are available
and the shipments that are ready--i. e., to bring together loads and
empty trucks.

Such a clearing house the local commercial organization can easily
provide. It will not ordinarily entail any special expense. It will
promote cooperation in the community. It will render a very real service
for which business men will be thoroughly grateful.

Return-Load Bureau is a convenient name for a clearing house. The bureau
should ascertain the established lines of trucks that run regularly on
fixed routes and the part of their capacity that is not being utilized.
It should then obtain information from all owners of trucks used for
private hauling, getting statements about the capacity of each truck,
how far its capacity is used, between what points the capacity is
unused, if the unused capacity can be made available for other persons
at a reasonable price, etc. Besides gathering this information the
bureau can make known to everyone that whenever a truck is to make a
trip without a load the bureau will respond to a telephone inquiry by
endeavoring to give the name of a person who wants to send a load over
the route in question. Efforts can be made also to have drivers who
bring loads by truck from other points telephone to the bureau in order
to get return loads.

At the same time the bureau can enlist the cooperation of business men
who may have shipments to make.

In order that any driver or other person from out of town may quickly
ascertain if there is a return load for him, each bureau should be
specially listed in the telephone directory.

With incidental questions the bureau will not usually need to deal. For
example, it can leave the compensation that is to be paid to negotiation
between the parties.

In England Return-Load Bureaus have proved of great assistance. They
have been most developed in the United States by commercial
organizations in Connecticut. Experience has demonstrated that the
assistance they can render is very real and important, and that they can
be organized advantageously in many communities where they have not as
yet been tried.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Highway Transport Commitee Council of
National Defence, Bulletins 1, by US Government

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HIGHWAY TRANSPORT COMMITEE ***

***** This file should be named 18878.txt or 18878.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/8/7/18878/

Produced by Jason Isbell and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
