Project Gutenberg's Jack Mason, The Old Sailor, by Theodore Thinker

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Jack Mason, The Old Sailor

Author: Theodore Thinker

Release Date: February 15, 2004 [EBook #11105]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JACK MASON, THE OLD SAILOR ***




Produced by The Internet Archive Children's Library, Andrea
Ball and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.





[Illustration: Jack telling his stories.]


JACK MASON,
THE OLD SAILOR.

WITH ILLUSTRATIONS.

FOR CHILDREN.

BY THEODORE THINKER.


1850.


THE OLD SAILOR.


Jack Mason had been to sea a great many times when I first knew him,
and he has been a great many times since. He has sailed in a ship
almost all over the world. Such a host of stories as he can tell!
Why, I do believe if he could find little boys and girls to talk to,
he would begin in the morning as soon as he had got through his
breakfast, and do nothing but tell stories about what he has seen,
until it was time to go to bed at night. I don't know but he would
want to stop once or twice to eat. Jack loves a good dinner as well
as anybody.

Jack is the one that you see in the picture, with his pea-jacket on,
and a book in his hand. He is in a ship, telling his stories now to
that boy sitting on a coil of rope. See, the boy is looking right at
the old man, hearing all he says. I wonder what Jack is talking about
now. He must be telling one of his best stories, I guess; for the boy
lifts his head up, as much as to say, "Dear me! who ever heard of
such a thing!"

Jack is a good man. He is not like a great many sailors that I have
seen. He does not use bad words. He never drinks rum, or any thing of
the kind. Sailors are apt to swear; but Jack Mason never swears. He
is a Christian: he loves to pray and read his Bible. The book which he
holds in his hand, as he is talking to that boy, is a Bible. He often
has a Bible in his jacket pocket, when he is on board of his ship; and
once in a while he stops telling stories about what he has seen, and
reads some of the stories in that good book.

When I was a little boy, Jack fell from the high mast of the ship, and
hurt himself so badly that he had to stay at home a long time after
that. Poor fellow! he did not like to be shut up in the house. It was
hard work for him. But he could not go out, until his hip got well.
When he was able to sit up in a chair, I used to go and see him, and
hear him tell his stories. I did not go every day, because my mother
thought I had better not go every day. But I went as often as she
would let me go, and staid as long as she would let me stay.

Jack was always glad to see me, and glad to tell me stories. I was
always glad to hear his stories. Some sailors, who have spent a great
deal of time on board of a ship, and have seen a great many places,
are not good men. They do not always tell the truth. So, when they
tell stories about what they saw where they went, we do not know
whether to believe them or not. But Jack Mason was a good man, and I
knew he would not tell me what was not true.

Shall I tell you some of the stories that this good old sailor told me
when he had to stay at home, because he had broken his hip? I think I
can remember some worth telling again.

"O yes, Mr. Thinker, tell us all the stories the old sailor told you."

"No, I cannot do that. I cannot remember them all."

"Well, tell us all you do remember."

"I will see about it. I will tell you some of them, at any rate. Let
me see, what story shall I tell first? Shall I tell you his story
about what he saw once, when he sailed a great way north? I guess I
will."

[Illustration]




JACK MASON'S VISIT TO THE NORTH SEA.


If you should go a great way north, you would find it very cold. The
further you go north, the colder it is. I went so far that way one
time, that I got almost frozen. The ship I sailed in came close to
an iceberg once, and we all thought for a while that the ship would
strike the iceberg. If it had struck, it would have been broken all
in pieces, and we should have been drowned or frozen, every one of us.
God was kind and good to us, though. The wind was blowing very hard,
and right toward the iceberg. But just as we had got almost up to it,
the wind changed, and blew us away from it.

But I forgot that you do not know what an iceberg is. It is a great
hill of ice. In the North Sea, these ice-hills are often as high as
your church, and sometimes a great deal higher. These hills of ice
are floating along the water there, and when it is foggy or dark, the
sailors cannot always see them. So sometimes the ship strikes them,
and is dashed to pieces. Sometimes it gets between two of these
ice-hills, and gets crushed, as if it was a little boat. Then the men
in the ship have to get out, and jump upon one of the ice-hills. But
they are pretty likely to be frozen to death then.

[Illustration: The Indians.]




THE INDIANS.


In that cold country I saw some Indians. They were dressed in skins.
I never saw such dirty-looking men and women before in all my life,
and I have never seen any such since. They had never seen a ship
before, I should think. I thought they did not know much more than
the white bears. Why, they would sell almost all the clothes they had
on, if we would give them a few pieces of glass, or a nail or two.
One of the women who came to the ship had a little girl about four
years old, and she said she would give us that girl, if we would let
her have a tin pan which she saw.

These Indians tie their children on their backs, when they have to
walk a great way. They licked the oil on the outside of our lamps,
just as a dog or a cat would have done. Oh, what dirty people! They
eat their meat raw. We killed a seal one day, and our captain gave it
to one of the young women. She took it, and bit it into pieces with
her teeth. Then she passed it round to the rest of the Indians, and
they all helped eat it.

[Illustration]




THE WHITE BEARS.


There are a great many white bears in that country. Sometimes you can
see two or three of them sitting on one of these ice-hills. How they
ever got there, I am sure I cannot tell. I guess they went out on the
ice only a little way from the shore, to get something which they saw
was good to eat; and while they were on the ice, it started off, and
they could not get to the shore again.

One of the men who sailed in the same ship with me, told me a story
about a white bear, which made me laugh for an hour after I heard it.
He said he was in a small boat with another sailor once, about a mile
away from the ship. I forget what they went out in the boat for, but I
suppose the captain of the ship sent them out for something. They were
rowing along in the boat, and they came close to an iceberg. They saw
something alive on the iceberg, but they could not make out what it
was: they did not know but it was a man. But they came a little nearer
to the great ice-hill, and they soon found out what sort of a thing
there was on it. _Splash_ something went into the water; and in a
minute a great white bear jumped into the boat, as wet as a drowned
rat.

Well, the sailors thought they had got to die, sure enough. What could
they do? The first thing that they thought of, was to try to kill the
bear with their oars. But they soon gave that up. They saw that the
bear was too large and strong to be killed in that way. The next thing
they thought of doing, was to jump into the water. But they knew they
would die if they did that. What should they do? "I wonder which of us
the old fellow will take first," one of the men said to the other.
Each of them had his oar ready, so that when the bear made a spring at
them, he would get his ears boxed pretty sharply. That was all they
could do.

Well, the bear did not seem to be at all in a hurry. The first thing
he did, after he got into the boat, was to shake himself as hard as he
could, to get the water out of his coat. After that, he walked slowly
to one end of the boat, just as if he was quite at home there, and lay
down upon a coat which one of the men had brought along, and went to
sleep.

The sailors saw then that all they had to do was to row the bear to
the shore. So they went to work. When they got to the ship, the
captain and all the sailors laughed a good deal, you may be sure. The
shore was not far off. The sailors rowed until the boat touched the
shore, and the bear got out, and walked slowly away. He did not so
much as thank the men for the ride he had been taking. But the men
were glad to get rid of him, thanks or no thanks.

[Illustration]




CATCHING WHALES.


I went in a whale-ship once. I was gone from home that time more than
three years. When we came back, we had our large ship all full of oil
and whalebone. We got the oil and the whalebone out of the whales
which we had caught. Whales, you know, are very large fish. They
sometimes get two or three hundred barrels of oil from one single
whale.

I never shall forget what a long chase I had with a whale once. Shall
I tell you about it, little friend? There was a man in the ship who
was looking out for whales. In a whale-ship there is always one man
who gets up as high as he can, and keeps a bright look-out all round
for whales. Whales do not stay under water all the time. The trout,
and the shad, and the eel, and most other kinds of fish can stay under
water all the time. They cannot live out of the water only a few
minutes, and I suppose they feel almost as bad out of the water as we
do in it. But the whale wants to come up to the top of the water. He
wants to come up to breathe. Well, all at once, the man who was
looking out the day I speak of, when I had such a run, sung out as
loud as he could, "There she blows!" We all knew what that meant. That
is what they always say when they see a whale. It means, "There is a
whale come up to breathe." This whale was a great way off. I should
think he was a mile from the ship.

Well, the captain told some of us to get into a boat, and to go out
after the whale. We did so. The boats are always kept ready, and it
takes only a minute to let the boat down, and start off. We rowed as
fast as we could, until we came up near where the whale was lying.
Oh, what a large whale! As soon as the boat got near enough, one man
threw two harpoons at the whale, and they both stuck fast in his
flesh. A harpoon is a long and sharp iron, made like a spear, so that
when it strikes the whale, it goes in deep, and you cannot pull it
out. The harpoon is fastened to a long rope, and the rope is tied to
the boat.

As soon as the whale felt these irons in his side, he began to run.
I never knew before that a whale could swim so fast. It took him only
a very little while to run out with all the loose rope; and our boat
went through the water pretty fast, you may be sure. I was afraid the
whale would take it into his head to dive down towards the bottom. If
he had gone down, we should have gone with him, unless we could have
cut the rope. But he did not go down. Away we went, as fast as if we
had been on a railroad. He was all the time taking us further from the
ship. "Well," we thought, "what is going to become of us!" The whale
did not seem to care any thing about that. I suppose he thought that
was our look-out, and not his.

But the fellow got tired out by and by. He had bled so much, that he
began to grow faint. At last he went so slow, that we rowed up to him,
and stabbed him with a long knife. He died pretty soon after that,
and we got more than two hundred barrels of oil out of him.

Catching whales seems a cruel business to you. It is a cruel business.
I never liked it. But somebody must do it. The butcher who kills
oxen, and sheep, and calves, has to be cruel. But we must have
butchers. We must have people to kill whales, though you never will
catch me chasing after a whale again, as long as my name is Jack
Mason.

Whales do not always run like the one I have told you about. Sometimes
they fight. After they are struck with the harpoon, they lift their
tail, or _fluke_, as they call it, and strike the boat so hard as to
dash it in pieces. Then the poor sailors have to swim to the ship if
they can. If they cannot, and if there is no other boat near them that
they can get into, they must drown.

I once saw a whale that had been struck with a harpoon come up close
to the ship, and give it such a blow with his fluke, that he tore the
copper off at a great rate, and broke a thick plank in half a dozen
pieces.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: The Indian, with his bow and arrows.]




MORE INDIANS.


When I went in the whale-ship, I saw another tribe of Indians, that
were very different from those I told you of before. They knew more
than those Indians. They used bows and arrows; and you would have been
pleased to see how they would hit a mark a great way off, with their
arrows.

One of them, who had a name so long that I will not try to speak it,
used to come every day to our ship, when we were lying near the shore.
He liked pieces of glass, and nails and tin, and things of that kind,
quite as well as the other Indians I told you of. He had seen white
men before, so he was not at all afraid of us. I suppose that almost
all the white men he had seen before used rum and tobacco. He asked
all our sailors for these two things, and kept asking every day. I am
sorry to say that some of the men gave him some rum once in a while,
and one day he drank so much that he got drunk. Poor man! He was not
so much to blame, I think, as the bad sailors that gave him the rum.
What do you think about it?

This man would dive in the water further than anybody I ever saw
before or since. Some of the sailors used to throw pieces of tin into
very deep water, and tell him he might have them if he would dive and
bring them up. He was so fond of such things, that he would always
gladly dive to get them.

I once saw him dive for an old worn-out knife. The water was very deep
where it was thrown. It was so deep that none of us thought he would
get it. He went down, and staid a long, long time. We thought he never
would come up again. The sailor that threw the knife into the water
began to be sorry he had done it, because he thought the poor Indian
was drowned. But, by and by, he came up again, with the knife in his
mouth. He had been hunting after the knife on the bottom of the sea.

These Indians had boats which were made of the bark of trees. They
were so light, that an Indian could carry one of them on his shoulder.

The man who used to come to the ship so often, brought his little
girl with him one day. She was not more than six or seven years old.
She had never seen any white men before, and at first she was afraid
of us all. But when she saw that the white folks would not hurt her
any more than the Indians would, she liked us very well, and wanted to
stay with us all the time. The captain showed her his watch, and she
looked at it a long time. She thought she had never seen so strange a
thing before. "Is it alive?" she asked her father. He could not tell
whether it was alive or not, any more than the little girl could.

The captain liked the little girl very well. He wanted to take her
home with him. So he asked her father if his little girl might go a
great way off, where the white men lived. The Indians could not talk
like us. They could talk, but they did not use the same words. The
captain made out to tell the Indian what he wanted, by using signs,
just as he would have done if he had been talking with a deaf and dumb
man. And what do you think the father of that little girl said, when
he knew that the captain wanted to take the girl home with him? If
anybody should ask your father if he would let you go away and never
come back again, you can tell what your father would say. He would
say, "No, I cannot spare my dear little child."

[Illustration]

But the Indian said, "Yes, give me some money, and you can take my
little girl, and carry her away with you. I have got more girls in my
house." The little Indian girl wanted to go with us, so the captain
gave her father some money, and when the ship sailed, he took her
along with him. But the poor Indian girl did not live till our ship
got home. She was taken very sick, and died. We all felt very bad
when she left us. We had taught her a great many things. She could
read a little. She knew all her letters, and could spell out such easy
words as there are in your little primers and picture books. She did
not know any thing about God, and Christ, and heaven, before she came
to the ship. But some of us told her about them. She was glad to hear
about them. Oh, how her bright eyes did sparkle when she heard that
Christ came into the world, and died for such little girls as she! How
happy it made her, to think that He loved her! By and by, she used to
pray every night, when she went to bed. I taught her to say that sweet
little prayer which you know so well, and love so well:

  Now I lay me down to sleep,
  I pray the Lord my soul to keep:
  If I should die before I wake,
  I pray the Lord my soul to take.

Oh, I was very sorry when our little Anna died! We called her Anna.
She had another name at home, but we liked Anna better than we did
her old name. I was very sorry when she died, and we were all sorry.

[Illustration: The Fishermen.]




THE LITTLE SAILOR BOY.


The story I told you about the Indian girl makes me think of a little
boy that we once had in our ship. He was a very good boy. The captain
liked him very much. He was not the captain's child. But the captain
used to say that he loved little George as much as if he was his child.
The reason the captain loved him, and the reason everybody loved him,
was because he was so kind and so good natured, and because he always
did just as he was told to do.

I must tell you how George first came to live with us in the ship. We
were once a great many hundred miles off, and the wind blew very
hard. It blew so hard that we could not sail where we wanted to go,
and by and by the ship went upon a bank of sand. There we had to stay
a good while. We could not get away. Nobody was drowned. We ought to
have been very thankful for that. I hope we were thankful. While we
were lying on the sand bank, the waves dashed against the ship so
hard, that we were afraid it would break in pieces. We did not know
what to do. Some of us thought we might as well jump into the water,
and try to swim to the shore. But the captain said that we should
certainly get drowned if we tried to do that.

You wonder why we did not get into our boat, and row to the shore. We
should have done so if we had not lost our boat. But we had no boat.
The waves had dashed against it, and tore it away from the place where
we kept it, so that we could not get it again.

But when we thought we must all be lost, we saw a boat coming toward
the ship. Some fishermen had seen us, and were so kind that they came
to us in their boat, so that we could get to the shore. Oh, how glad
we were when we saw them coming! But the waves were so high, that for
a good while we thought it would sink before it got to us. The men had
very hard work to row the boat. The wind blew very hard at one time,
and the little boat was blown back again almost to the shore. But they
tried again, and after a long time they got to the ship. Then some of
us got into the boat, and the men rowed us to the shore. After that,
the boat went back to the ship again, and got the rest of the men.

But I have not told the best of the story yet. When we all got into
the house, where it was warm, we told the fishermen that they were
very good to come and help us get away from the ship. We thanked them
very much. And then they told us that we must not thank them; and they
pointed to a little boy about as old as you are, I guess. "There,"
they said, "that little boy is the one to thank. We should not have
gone, if it had not been for him. We were afraid the waves would dash
over the boat, and that we should be drowned. We did not dare to go.
But this good boy said, 'Do go! oh, do go! The poor men in the ship
will get drowned, if you do not go. I will go if my father will let
me. I do not think father's boat will get lost. God will not let us
drown, if we go and try to save the men.'" Well, the boy said so much,
that the fishermen told him they would go, and they did go.

This little boy's name was George, and this is the one that I told you
we all liked so well. The captain was so pleased with him, that he
asked his father to let the little boy come and sail in his ship. His
father said he wished his boy to be a sailor, and the boy wanted to be
a sailor, too; and that if the captain would be kind to him, little
George might go. So he went, and he was the very best boy I ever saw
in my life. He used to talk to the sailors; and when they did wrong,
when they said bad words, he would tell them it was naughty, and God
would not love them if they did so. The sailors did not get angry with
him, because they all saw that little George was good and kind, and
that he wanted to do them good. I know of a good many sailors who
stopped swearing, because little George told them, in his kind way,
that he could not bear to hear them swear, and that God would not love
them if they did so.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: Rocks in the Sea.]




THE WRECK.


The captain of this ship--the same one that loved little George so
well--was drowned not long after that. My little friends, I cannot
help crying when I think that this good captain, who used to be so
kind to the sailors, was lost at sea. I was not in the ship at the
time. I was in another ship. I got sick of catching whales, so I did
not want to go in a whale-ship any more.

The ship in which this captain was sailing was very near the shore,
and there were some high rocks that stood quite down to the edge of
the water. It was foggy at the time. The captain did not know that
the ship was so near the rocks, because he could not see through the
fog. The wind blew very hard, and blew the ship upon the rocks. In
a minute the ship broke in pieces, and all but two or three of the
men who were in it were lost. The captain was lost among the rest.
So was little George. When the storm was over, and the wind stopped
blowing, that dear boy was found on the shore, dead. There was a smile
on his face, just such a smile as he used to have when he was living.
There was a little Bible in his pocket. It was all wet with salt water.
But there was some writing on one of the leaves which anybody could
read. It said, "This book was given to little George by his dear
mother."

[Illustration: The Pyramids and the Sphynx.]




THE PYRAMIDS.

I once went to a place called Egypt. There I saw a great many strange
things. The pyramids are wonderful enough. Did you ever hear about
them? They are made of stone, and are very large. I should think it
would take a great many years to make one of them, if there were a
hundred men at work all the time. They must have been built a very
long time. I hardly know how long, but it was a great while before
Christ was born.

I went to the top of the largest pyramid, and went all over it. It was
one of the strangest things I ever saw. Some people think that the
pyramids were built to bury kings in, when they died. If they were
not built for that, I am sure I cannot tell what they were built for.

There is another odd thing in that country, not far from the pyramids.
It is called a _Sphinx_. I know you will say that the name must be
as odd as the thing is itself. Well, it _is_ odd, sure enough. The
Sphinx is a very large rock, made to look just like a lion with a
man's head. It is as large as the house I live in. There is nothing
but the head out of the ground. It was all out of the ground once,
when it was first made, but the sand has now covered up that part
which looks like a lion.

A great while ago, people used to call such things as these _gods_.
They used to pray to the Sphinx, just as if it was a god--just as if
it could hear anybody pray, the same as God does.

[Illustration]




THE WHIRLPOOL.


You have seen little whirlpools in the brook, I suppose. I once saw
a very large one, a great deal larger than any you ever saw in the
brook. It was in the North Sea. This whirlpool does mischief
sometimes. When vessels happen to get on the edge of it, they begin
to go round and round, all the time coming near the middle of the
whirlpool. When the captain of the vessel knows that he is in the
whirlpool, he can get his vessel out, if it has just begun to go
round. But after it has been in a while, he cannot get out. The vessel
keeps going round and round. The people on board hear the roar of the
whirlpool. It is too late to get away. By and by, the water draws the
vessel down. It is dashed to pieces, and all who were in it are lost!

I have known little boys and girls get into a whirlpool, too; a
different kind of a whirlpool, to be sure, but a great deal worse than
this one in the North Sea. I mean the whirlpool of _sin_. When they
first began to be wicked--when they first began to go round in the
whirlpool--they went round very slowly. They could very easily have
got out then, if they had tried, and if they had prayed to God to help
them. But they did not try. So they kept growing worse and worse. They
went round swifter and swifter. By and by, they got so far into the
whirlpool that they could not get out. It was too late. They were
lost--dashed to pieces on the rocks, in the whirlpool of sin!

Little boy! little girl! take care that you do not venture even to the
edge of this whirlpool. Give your heart to God, while you are young,
and pray to him to keep you from sin, and to lead you to heaven.





End of Project Gutenberg's Jack Mason, The Old Sailor, by Theodore Thinker

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JACK MASON, THE OLD SAILOR ***

***** This file should be named 11105.txt or 11105.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/1/1/0/11105/

Produced by The Internet Archive Children's Library, Andrea
Ball and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


