The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is Going On
In It, Vol. 1, No. 42, August 26, 1897, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Great Round World and What Is Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 42, August 26, 1897
       A Weekly Magazine for Boys and Girls

Author: Various

Editor: Julia Truitt Bishop

Release Date: May 27, 2005 [EBook #15919]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD AND ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.(www.pgdp.net)






_FIVE CENTS._

THE GREAT ROUND WORLD
AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT

  Vol. 1                AUGUST 26, 1897                No. 42.
[Entered at Post Office, New York City, as second class matter]

[Illustration: A
WEEKLY
NEWSPAPER
FOR
BOYS AND
GIRLS]

Subscription
$2.50 per year
$1.25 6 months


    WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON. PUBLISHER
    NO. 3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST. NEW YORK CITY

=Copyright, 1897, by WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON.=

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: The Scientific Box Kite

How to put in the sticks

The Start]

                         =PATENT APPLIED FOR=
                         =The Latest Thing...=
                         =Scientific Box Kite=

     To any one sending us =1= new subscriber we will send one of these
     kites.

Scientific kite flying has attracted the attention of the world. This
kite is the invention of H.H. Clayton, Chief Observer at Blue Hill
Observatory, near Boston. It is used at this and other weather stations
for sending up instruments in making observations. Kites of this type
have attained the wonderful height of 9,200 feet, nearly two miles.

Anybody can fly this kite. It goes up straight from the hand like a
bird. Will fly in a moderate breeze, and yet no wind short of a gale is
too strong for it. It is made of strong, selected wood, and the finest
cotton, in red.

                    =THE GREAT ROUND WORLD=
     =3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST.              NEW YORK CITY=

       *       *       *       *       *

Do you Cover your Books?

    THE "ONE PIECE"
    ADJUSTABLE BOOK COVERS

are made of the strongest and best book-cover paper obtainable. This paper
is made in large quantities especially for these book covers and will
protect books perfectly. The book covers themselves are a marvel of
ingenuity, and, although they are in one piece and can be adjusted to fit
perfectly any sized book without cutting the paper, they are also so
simple that any boy or girl can use them; as they are already gummed they
are always ready for use.

A sample dozen will be mailed to any address for 20 cents (or ten two-cent
stamps) if you write

    WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON

    3 and 5 West 18th Street, New York City

       *       *       *       *       *

                                  =FOR SALE=

500 Wentworth's Primary Arithmetics                        10c. each

250    "    Grammar School   "                             25c.  "

300 Brooks' Elementary       "                             10c.  "

150    "    New Written      "                             25c.  "

500 Colburn's New Mental     "                             10c.  "

100 Wheeler's Second Lessons                               25c.  "

200 Harvey's Practical Grammars, _not revised, new_        20c.  "

200    "     Elementary    "         "     "      "        10c.  "

200 Kerl's Language Lessons, _new_                         10c.  "

125 Dozen Haile's Drawing Books, _new_                     50c. doz.

100   "   Barnes'    "      "        "                     40c.  "

200   "   White's, Krone's, etc., _new_                    25c. to 60c.  "

 50 Williams' Composition, _not revised, new_              40c. each

 50 Kellogg's Rhetorics, 276 pages, _new_                  50c.  "

200 Continental Fourth Readers                             25c.  "

200      "      Fifth     "                                25c.  "

100 Lippincott's  "       "                                25c.  "

100 Davis' Fourth Readers                                  25c.  "

     All of the above books are used copies, good condition,
     except where marked new.

     =French and German Books, Arithmetics, Geographies, and
     Text-Books of all kinds at low prices.=

           =WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON=
     3 and 5 West 18th Street, New York City

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE GREAT ROUND
WORLD
AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT.]

    VOL. 1   AUGUST 26, 1897.   NO. 42


The most important news of the past week is the step which Great Britain
has taken in breaking off the commercial treaties with Germany and
Belgium, which have been in effect since 1865.

By the terms of these treaties, Great Britain gave her word that no
articles manufactured in either of these countries should be charged
higher tariff duties in her colonies than similar articles of British
manufacture.

For instance, on German and Belgian cloth, exactly the same duty is
charged in Canada and Australia and the colonies generally as on the
English cloth. You would have supposed that England, being the mother
country, would have been charged a lower tariff than foreign countries,
but according to the treaties this was impossible.

By breaking these treaties it has, however, become possible for Great
Britain to make arrangements whereby her merchandise can be introduced
into her colonies on terms that are very favorable to herself.

In taking this step England is only closing the last chapter of a volume
of her history, and when she makes her new treaties with her colonies
she will be commencing the first chapter of the new history of the
British Empire that is yet to be written.

This matter is of such vast importance, in the bearing that it will have
on the future, that we must try our best to understand it.

England's importance and wealth lie in her colonies. She is but a "right
little, tight little island" of herself; but when regarded from the
standpoint of her possessions, her territory covers about one-sixth of
the land surface of the globe (see map, page 1189). Her possessions lie
north, south, east, and west, till it is rightly said that "the sun
never sets on England's glory."

All her various dependencies are self-governing. They have their own
legislatures, impose their own taxes, and manage their own affairs
socially, politically, and commercially.

At the same time, the colonies are absolutely a part of the British
Empire. The lands belong to the Crown, and the Crown derives an income
from the profits of the colonies.

Though the legislature is made up of representatives chosen by the
people, the governor of each province or colony is appointed by the
Crown, and governs in the name of the Queen.

The local governments can make what laws they please, but any act of the
colonial parliament that is obnoxious to England can be annulled by the
British Parliament.

While England endeavors to make the colonies independent, she also
insists on their being obedient. She maintains armies to protect them,
stands ready to advance the young colonies money for their development,
and rules them in a kindly and beneficent way.

There is no question of taxing and draining the resources of the country
for the sake of gain, as in the olden days, or as Spain does at the
present; the English policy since Victoria came to the throne has been
to develop and improve the colonies and make them self-supporting and
independent.

The colonies are represented in the British Parliament by the Colonial
Secretary, who is a Cabinet officer, and holds one of the most important
positions in the Government. The wishes and desires of the colonies are
made known to Parliament through him.

For years people have discussed the position of the colonies, and
whether it would not be better if the bonds between the mother country
and her dependencies were more closely drawn. It has often been
suggested that England should band her possessions together into one
vast empire, on the principle of our own United States. Each country
would then have representatives in the British Parliament, just as our
various States are represented at Washington, and all these countries
would be joined together for offence and defence just as we are.

Such a federation would make Great Britain an enormous power. The
British possessions are scattered all over the globe. Were she to
federate with her colonies the declaration of war on her part with any
country would mean that Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and British
South America would all join in the fight, and help to uphold England's
quarrel. England could then dictate to the world, and her power would
exceed that of ancient Rome in its days of greatest glory.

This scheme has always been a dream of ambitious English statesmen, but
the policy of the British Government has always been against it.

The idea was so vast that no one dared advise the taking of the first
step.

The British Ministers feared that the result of the federation would be
a combination of all the rest of Europe against England, so they adopted
the policy of keeping good friends with their European neighbors, and
allowing the colonies to wait yet a little longer for federation.

The modern statesmen have been extending British influence ever further
and further, in the hope of one day accomplishing the great federation.

It was this dream that was behind the Transvaal raid. The Colonial
Secretary, Mr. Joseph Chamberlain, desired to see the whole of South
Africa under the sovereignty of England, and Mr. Cecil Rhodes had no
objection to making the effort to realize this wish, because the scheme
would have proved as profitable to himself as to the Government. That to
accomplish his purpose he had to crush the Boers, and drive them out of
their own country, was nothing to him; he did not hesitate at anything
that was to be for the honor and glory of England--and the subsequent
enriching of Cecil Rhodes.

The scandal over the Raid brought the idea of federation to the front
again, and when the Jubilee celebrations took place a move was made to
secure it.

Eleven of the colonial premiers, or prime ministers, attended the
Jubilee, and during their visit to London they held a conference to
discuss the project.

At this meeting the Colonial Secretary took the old ground that the
matter was of such vast importance that it must not be approached
hastily.

The Canadian premiers were, however, anxious that some step should be
taken, and Sir Wilfrid Laurier, from Canada, voiced the sentiments of
his brother premiers when he stated that the time had come for the
colonies to draw more closely to the empire, or separate from it
altogether.

England found herself in a dilemma. While she had been careful to bring
up her colonies to be independent of her, she had not realized that one
day they might become too independent, and seek to break away from her
rule altogether. She had repeated none of the mistakes of oppression and
greed that had cost her the American colonies, and she had supposed that
her other colonies would be satisfied to belong to the British Crown.

Sir Wilfrid Laurier's hint was enough for her.

She was well aware that the tie which binds Canada to her is so slight
that it might easily be broken, and realizing the danger of the
situation, she determined to throw aside her old foreign policy, and
adopt new measures to bind her colonies more closely to her.

Sir Wilfrid Laurier, who is a statesman of a very high order, had
foreseen what England's answer would be, and last winter prepared the
way for the breaking of the German and Belgian treaties.

He engineered a tariff law, offering about twelve per cent reduction the
first year, and twenty-five per cent thereafter, of tariff dues to all
countries admitting Canadian goods on certain favorable terms.

It was thoroughly understood at the time that England was the only
country which could benefit by such an arrangement. England, as you
know, believes in free trade, and has now but twenty articles subject to
tariff; the most important of these are beer, wine, spirits, tobacco,
tea, coffee, and soap.

With such a very small list of dutiable imports you can readily see how
easy it is for England to be the country which gives the best terms to
Canadian goods.

When this Canadian tariff was first made the other nations smiled at it
as a meaningless piece of legislation, but as they thought over it they
saw its true meaning, and at once denounced it as an attempt to make
England false to her agreement with Germany and Belgium.

England saw the force of this herself, and did not attempt to take
advantage of the reduced rates of the Canadian tariff.

This did not disconcert Sir Wilfrid Laurier in the least. He had put the
new law through for a certain purpose, and he was willing to wait
patiently until he could secure the desired end.

His opportunity came at the Conference.

After the Colonial Secretary had answered the premiers that he thought
it better to wait a while before federating, the Canadian Prime Minister
made a very earnest speech.

Having first stated that the time had come to take some decided action,
he said that he and all the other premiers were of one mind that Great
Britain should make an end of all her treaties with foreign countries
which hampered her trade with her colonies.

He added that if this were done the various governments would see if
some arrangement could not be made by which a preference would be given
to British manufactures.

These remarks met with the most enthusiastic indorsement from the other
prime ministers, who requested that they be embodied in a resolution,
and presented to the Colonial Secretary for parliamentary consideration.

Mr. Chamberlain therefore laid the matter before the government, and it
was thereupon decided to end the two treaties mentioned.

Notice was accordingly sent to both Germany and Belgium that the
existing treaties would cease on July 30, 1898.

Canada and the colonies are highly elated over this matter, for it is
understood that this is but the first step toward federation.

That the foreign Powers will be very much opposed to this plan is a
foregone conclusion.

The foreign journals are speaking very severely about it, and saying
that England is much mistaken if she thinks that such an arrangement
would make her powerful enough to dictate to the world.

The day when federation will be completed is still very far off,
however; the colonies themselves are not federated as yet, and it is
hard to suppose that they are ready to come together and be happy as one
country with England when they are still divided among themselves.
Newfoundland is outside the Canadian federation; Cape Colony, in South
Africa, is divided into several states; Australia has five separate
states, each with its own governor and legislature. These states should
first be joined together before they can safely venture to combine with
the mother country in an alliance which would be against the world.

Germany and Belgium are both incensed that England should seek to put an
end to the treaties. Some hot heads in Germany are urging their
Government to return blow for blow, and commence a tariff war with
England.

       *       *       *       *       *

With wars and rumors of wars about us, the necessity of being prepared
for any emergency has presented itself very strongly to the Secretaries
of both the Army and the Navy.

While our standing army is small, our military arrangements are such
that we need have little anxiety on the score of the army. We have a
large State Militia always at the service of the country, and we have
the right to call on all able-bodied citizens between the ages of
eighteen and forty-five for military service in case of need. This
brings the number of men capable of bearing arms in our defense up to
the number of ten millions.

Our army, therefore, is on a satisfactory basis.

With our navy, things are different. It has come to be a recognized fact
among nations that countries who wish to be respected abroad must have a
sufficient naval force to compel that respect when necessary.

Our navy is not as large as the importance of our country demands, and
it is the intention of the Secretary of the Navy to ask Congress to
make appropriations to enable him to have several new ships built.

Meanwhile he is in a good deal of difficulty over the armor for the
ships that are being built.

Armor is a covering of thick steel plates with which all the modern
battleships are supplied. It is intended to protect their hulls from the
cannon-balls and projectiles that are now used in warfare.

There are three ships now building for the Government, the _Illinois_,
_Alabama_, and _Wisconsin_, and the cause of the trouble is that no firm
can be found willing to supply the armor-plate for the price fixed by
Congress.

This price is $300 per ton.

Congress had a long discussion about the matter, and decided that this
was a fair and proper price to pay, and instructed the Secretary of the
Navy to buy it for this sum.

The Secretary had his doubts about the possibility of doing as he was
required, because he knew that the iron and steel manufacturers asked a
much higher price.

He, however, did as Congress desired, with the result that the Carnegie
Company refused point-blank, saying they could not possibly manufacture
it for that price. Several other firms also declined, and finally,
giving up all hope of placing the contracts, the Secretary suggested
that the Government should make its own armor-plate.

Agreeably to this suggestion, a board has been formed to look into the
matter, and see whether it is possible for the Government to enter into
this business with profit to itself.

While some people declare that it will cost the Government twice as much
to manufacture the armor, others think that it can be made for
considerably less than the companies ask.

The history of this affair is very interesting.

About 1885, Mr. Whitney, who was then Secretary of the Navy, induced a
private company, the Bethlehem Iron Works, to build the first American
armor plant, by making a number of contracts with them which would keep
them busy furnishing armor for battleships for several years.

The price then fixed was $580 per ton, and the armor to be supplied was
what is known as steel armor.

Before the first contract could be filled, the next Secretary, Mr.
Tracy, had his attention called to some new kinds of armor that were
being introduced.

One kind was being made by an English firm, and another by a French
company.

The English plan was to make what is called compound armor. This was
hard steel welded on to a back of softer metal, the idea being that the
soft back would act as a sort of cushion, and save the front part of the
plate from being cracked by the blows of the shot.

The French system was to make a mixture of steel and nickel. They
claimed that the nickel alloy would give greater strength to the plate.

Secretary Tracy was so anxious that we should have the best possible
armor for our battleships that he ordered a plate from both companies,
and sent them to the Naval Academy at Annapolis to be tested.

The big guns were tried on first one and then the other; the English
armor cracked in four pieces, but on the nickel steel the shot were
shattered into fragments.

Congress immediately voted that the new battleships should be supplied
with nickel-steel armor, and an appropriation was made for this purpose.

Before the new contract could be carried out, President Harrison learned
that a man named Harvey had invented a process for hardening the surface
of the steel used in making tools. This process was found to be so
excellent that it revolutionized the making of tools, which were
thereafter made from the hardened or "Harveyized steel."

This process had never been applied to any large surface, but it was
thought that if Harvey's method could be used for the nickel-steel
plates, a perfect armor would be the result.

The experiment was therefore tried. A large nickel-steel plate was
subjected to the process and then tested at Annapolis.

The result was highly satisfactory; all the projectiles sent against the
plate were shattered, while the plate remained comparatively uninjured.

The success of the Harvey process on the nickel steel was universally
acknowledged; other countries abandoned their previous style of armor,
and the United States set out to build a number of new ships that should
be protected with this invulnerable armor.

It was soon found that the Bethlehem Company was not able to furnish all
the armor needed, and so the Government persuaded the Carnegie Company
to go into the armor-plate business. The Carnegie people were promised
an equal share of the work, and the same prices as the Bethlehem
Company.

Matters went on peacefully until July 10th of last year, when Congress
directed the Secretary of the Navy to inquire into the cost of making
armor-plate, and to give an idea of the price he thought the Government
ought to pay for it. The result of his inquiries was to be made known on
January 1st of this year.

The Secretary did make the inquiries, and found that the actual cost of
making a ton of armor-plate was $197.78.

After an elaborate calculation of profit and loss, and the cost of the
machinery used in making the armor, he decided that the armor could be
made for $250 a ton. He suggested that the Government ought then to
allow the companies a liberal sum per ton for profit on their
enterprise, and suggested that a fair price to pay would be $400 per
ton.

Had Congress accepted this suggestion there would have been an actual
saving of $180 a ton over the price made on the original contracts.

Congress was not, however, satisfied with this. If the Company could
make the iron and come out clear at $250 a ton, it was thought that a
profit of $150 a ton was too much to allow, and therefore Congress voted
that the Government price for armor-plate in future should be $300 per
ton.

They offered at this price to make a contract for twenty new
battleships, which would keep the armor works busy for the next ten
years.

The Carnegie and Bethlehem companies were indignant at this offer, and
refused it absolutely.

They insisted that they could not begin to supply armor for less than
$442 a ton, and that then they would be making little profit on their
work.

They reminded Congress that they had added costly machinery to their
plants to oblige the Government, and that the country ought to be
willing to pay them enough money for their work to reimburse them for
the sums they had laid out.

Congress would not listen to this argument. It declared that the
armor-plate people had formed a trust by which they hoped to force the
Treasury to pay them any price they chose to ask, and finally declared
that if armor-plate could be made at an actual cost of $197.78 per ton,
the Government would no longer pay $558 to benefit the pockets of
private individuals.

Further than this, Congress declared that if the Carnegie and Bethlehem
people would not make the armor for $300 a ton, the Government would go
into the business for itself, and leave these two companies with their
machinery on their hands.

The committee appointed to examine into the cost of establishing
government armor works is to be ready to hand in its report next
December.

In the mean while the three new warships that are building will have to
wait, and no new vessels can be commenced until this very important
matter is settled.

       *       *       *       *       *

Startling and terrible news reaches us from Spain.

Senor Canovas del Castillo (_Casteelyo_), the Spanish Prime Minister,
has been assassinated!

The whole of Europe is greatly excited by this dreadful news.

[Illustration: Map

The shaded portions are British possessions. Islands owned by Great
Britain have names attached.]

Senor Canovas had overworked himself during the last session of the
Cortes, and this, combined with the worry of Cuban affairs, had broken
down his health.

In the hope of regaining his strength he had gone to the baths of Santa
Aguada, at Guesalibar, on the Bay of Biscay, not far from San Sebastian,
where the court is summering.

[Illustration: Senor Canovas]

He was sitting reading his paper in the grounds of the bath-house when
he was shot and killed by an Italian ruffian.

In Senor Canovas, Spain has lost one of her greatest statesmen. It was
he who put Alfonso XII., the father of the present king, on the throne
of Spain.

During his whole career Spain has been the scene of many stormy trials.

In 1868 the people forced the old Queen, Isabella II., to resign the
throne. She was a very wicked woman, and did so many bad things that the
people would not be disgraced by her any longer. They rose against her,
and she was obliged to flee to France to seek the protection of Napoleon
III.

On her departure a council was appointed to choose a new sovereign.
There were several claimants, among them Alfonso, the son of the deposed
Isabella, and Don Carlos, the grandson of Don Carlos I. (See p. 563.)

The council rejected all the candidates, and chose a German prince.
Napoleon III. objected on Queen Isabella's account; the Germans were
incensed at his interference, and the argument that followed gave rise
to the Franco-German War in 1870.

The Spanish council, disappointed of their German prince, finally chose
a son of Victor Emmanuel of Italy, and made him King of Spain under the
title of Amadeus I.

The new King did not take kindly to his throne. The Carlists were
striving to gain the crown for their candidate, and the country was
plunged into the horrors of a civil war.

After a reign of two years and one month Amadeus abdicated and went back
to Italy, disgusted with the honors that had been thrust upon him.

This did not help the Carlists. A republic was declared which lasted
until 1874. In August of that year the republic was formally
acknowledged by all the countries of Europe except Russia, and in the
following December the people changed their minds once more, and
Alfonso, the son of Isabella, was proclaimed King by the Republican
armies.

Alfonso reigned eleven years, and died in the winter of 1885. In the
spring of 1886 the young King was born, his mother, Maria Christina of
Austria, was declared Regent, and will continue to govern the country
for the young Alfonso XIII. until he is old enough to take care of the
country himself.

During all these troublous times Canovas steadily upheld the crown;
through riot and revolution he never wavered, and was even banished from
Spain on one occasion because of his well-known sympathy for the crown.

When the right moment came he placed himself at the head of Alfonso's
friends, and succeeded in seating him on the throne.

Alfonso XII. never forgot the service Canovas had done him. He made him
his Prime Minister, and during his entire reign was guided by the
Minister's advice.

After Alfonso's death Canovas devoted himself to the service of the
Queen Regent, and has been her faithful ally and counsellor ever since.

The Minister was, however, a haughty and arrogant man. He made many
enemies through his pride, and despite the respect which both King and
Queen had for him, both were more or less afraid of him.

There are two stories about him which show how little he cared how he
offended even such mighty personages as his sovereigns.

On one occasion Alfonso XII., wishing to reward him for some service,
offered to make him a duke. Canovas is said to have replied to the
King:

"Sire, I made you a king--how can you make me a duke!"

One day, during Alfonso's lifetime, the Queen got very much out of
temper with her consort, and allowed herself to give way to her anger
before the court.

Canovas was greatly displeased, and followed the Queen to her
apartments.

"Madam," he said, as soon as they were alone, "the interests of the
monarchy are of more importance than your private feelings. To-morrow
you will leave Spain for Austria, and await my orders in Vienna."

Astonishing as it may seem, the Queen obeyed.

Canovas ruled with a rod of iron. It is stated that his murder was
committed in revenge for some terrible cruelties that were practised in
Barcelona by his orders. A little over a year ago a bomb was thrown into
one of the churches in Barcelona. Four hundred people were arrested, and
it was supposed that the bomb-throwing was the outcome of an Anarchist
plot.

Numbers of the persons arrested were evidently innocent, and the
Government could not find out who was responsible for the outrage.
Canovas refused to believe that any of the people arrested were
innocent, but insisted that they knew all about it if they could only be
made to speak, and so he ordered them tortured in the most inhuman ways
to make them confess.

The man who shot Canovas declared, when he was arrested, that his
brother had been tortured in Barcelona, and that he had killed the
Minister in revenge.

Great statesman and good friend to the crown as Canovas was, he was a
bad friend to the people. He believed in force. It was he who chose
General Weyler to go to Cuba, well knowing his ferocious character, and
that he would be sure to treat the insurgents with great severity.

Now that Canovas is dead the Cubans believe that the war will soon be
brought to a close. They think that Sagasta will be appointed to fill
the place of the murdered Minister, and that he will at once recall
Weyler, and send Campos in his place.

They think that Sagasta will offer them home rule, and if they refuse
it, and show a determination to continue the war, that Sagasta will
weaken and offer to give up the island for a sum of money.

One Cuban, being asked what effect he thought the death of Canovas would
have, replied:

"He has done more to harm Cuba than Weyler, and through his death the
unfortunate island will lose two of her worst enemies. Canovas' death
means Cuba's freedom!" But, naturally, a Cuban's estimate of a Spanish
Minister cannot, be accepted as an unprejudiced one.

To his sovereign and his country Senor Canovas has ever been a most
faithful servant. In him the Queen Regent loses the one man on whom
Spain relied for help out of her present difficulties.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Coal Strike is still unsettled.

A determined effort is being made to get the Pittsburg miners to join
the strike. There is a great Pittsburg firm called the New York and
Cleveland Gas and Coal Company, of which Mr. W.P. De Armitt is the head.
It is a most important firm, and the strikers think that if they can
only get De Armitt's men to join them they are sure of success.

The De Armitt men are, however, quite content with their treatment, and
not anxious to join the strike. To win them over, large bands of
striking miners have camped near the De Armitt mines, and every morning
they march to the pit's mouth, intercepting the men as they are going to
work, and urging them to join the strike and help their fellows.

They have already persuaded many of the men to leave work.

They have been very orderly so far, and though fears of violence are
entertained, as yet there has been no rioting.

The only person who has got into trouble has been Debs.

When the strike was first organized, Debs and the other labor agitators
declared that it was impossible for the strike to fail if the miners
only held together. They gave such a rosy picture of the whole affair,
that many of the miners believed that the great strike would be settled
with little delay or trouble.

They were quite unprepared for the long and bitter struggle into which
it has developed, and many of them are angry with Debs and the other
agitators for misrepresenting affairs to them. Debs is therefore losing
influence with the miners just now.

On the other hand, the coal-owners are combining against him, declaring
that but for his mischievous intermeddling, everything could have been
adjusted without trouble.

The mine-owners of West Virginia have therefore sought relief through
the law, and obtained a judge's order, forbidding Debs, or any of his
fellow-agitators, from making any efforts to induce the miners to
strike.

They are forbidden to make speeches or conduct parades, or gather crowds
in the mining districts.

This is a severe blow to the agitators. The cooperation of the West
Virginia miners is also considered essential to success.

These men, like De Armitt's, have no grievances of their own for which
they need redress, and it has not been easy to persuade them that they
ought to strike for the sake of their less fortunate brothers.

To obtain any such result it is necessary to have a number of speakers
constantly talking to the men, and teaching them, and urging them.

The order forbidding speaking and persuading is a hard blow to Debs and
his workers.

He, however, declares that he is not discouraged, and that he will win
the strike in spite of every effort of the owners.

While the coal trade has been thus agitated, a curious labor difficulty
has arisen in Paterson, New Jersey.

There are, as you know, labor unions all over the country. Every trade
has its own special union. The members of these unions, when they first
join, bind themselves to be guided by the rules and laws laid down by
the officers of the union.

The United Broad Silk Weavers' Union held a meeting the other day, in
which it adopted a certain scale of wages, and sent out an order that no
member was to work for any other wages than those fixed by the Union.

When this order was sent to Paterson there was great consternation.
Nearly all the weavers there are members of the union, and when they
came to examine the new scale which they were bound to abide by, they
found it to be below the rate of wages which they were at that moment
receiving.

The Paterson weavers have been enjoying good wages, and are in
comfortable circumstances. Since the inauguration of President McKinley
they have gone on strike several times. Their employers thought their
demands were just, and agreed to give them the increase they asked, so
that they have settled their own affairs in a way that is highly
satisfactory to themselves.

Now comes this order from the labor union, and they are in a terrible
dilemma.

If they obey the rules of their order, they will have to go in a body to
their employers, and ask to have their wages reduced.

If they do not, they will be obliged to leave the union; and if in
future their employers try to get the best of them, they will then have
no one to come forward and fight their battles for them.

The outcome of this affair is being watched with a good deal of
amusement and interest.

       *       *       *       *       *

A scientific expedition, headed by Professor Libbey, of Princeton
University, started early in July to explore a mesa or table-land of
sandstone which rises out of the alkali plains, in the neighborhood of
Albuquerque, New Mexico.

This mesa is seven hundred feet high. Its top has never before been
trodden by man, for it rises from the plain with perpendicular walls
that are inaccessible to even the most experienced mountain-climbers.

The mesa is situated near the Indian village of Acoma, and is called by
the natives the Enchanted Mesa. They have a wonderful legend about it.

The rock is fifteen acres in extent and, according to their story, was
once the dwelling-place of the Acoma tribe. After a while, as the tribe
increased, there was not room enough on the rock for their dwellings and
their fields, so they made a way down the rock, and used to send their
able-bodied men below to sow and reap, while the aged and the young did
the housekeeping on top of the mesa.

The story goes on to say that once, when the young men were away in the
fields, a terrible storm arose; the thunders raged and the winds blew,
and when at last the storm subsided it was found that the rocky
staircase by which the Acomas were used to go up and down had been
entirely swept away.

The Indians ran round and round the rock, but everywhere they found the
straight walls as we see them to-day. It was impossible to climb them;
they could not get up to the friends they had left behind, nor could the
unfortunate people come down to them.

For days they tried every means to reach the top, but they could not do
so. They could see their friends peering over at them, but day by day
the faces grew fewer and fewer, until at last all were gone.

Since then the mesa has been held sacred by the Acomas, and regarded by
them as a city of the dead.

This legend has been so thoroughly believed that scientists have often
discussed the possibility of scaling this rock for the sake of the
wonderful remains that must be on the top. Finally Professor Libbey
determined to make the attempt.

He took with him a life-saving apparatus, of the kind that is used on
the sea-coast for sending a line out to a wrecked vessel. His plan was
to throw the line over the rock, and then have himself hauled up in an
arrangement of ropes, used by sailors for working over the side of
ships, and called by them a boatswain's chair.

The life-saving apparatus was tried, and proved to be most successful. A
rocket was sent up with the life-line attached, and on the second effort
was shot clear over the rock.

The line thus thrown was a thin quarter-inch rope; to this a strong
hawser was attached, and after infinite labor pulled across the mesa's
top. The boatswain's chair was then attached, and with the aid of a pair
of strong horses, who pulled away at one end of the rope, the professor
was hauled to the top of the rock.

To his disappointment he found no traces whatever of former inhabitants,
and no evidences that any human being had ever trodden the rock's
surface before.

He found plenty of water standing in pools, which had evidently been
left from recent rains, and plenty of grass and trees similar to those
found on the summits of the other buttes in the neighborhood, but the
legend of the Acomas was evidently a myth.

He went from end to end of the Mesa, but there was not the slightest
sign of cave or dwelling, nor even a scrap of broken pottery to prove
that the rock had once been inhabited.            G.H. ROSENFELD.





INVENTION AND DISCOVERY.


PORTABLE REFRIGERATING CASE.--It must be some one who loves to go on
picnics or excursions who has thought out this delightful contrivance, a
portable refrigerator. It comprises an inner case which holds bottles
and ice, and an outer case with a partition into which the water from
the ice can run, and with means for drawing it off.

[Illustration: Portable Refrigerating Case]

A fair supply of ice would insure bottles of cold water, milk,
ginger-ale, etc, throughout a long day's trip.

LEAK-STOPPER FOR PNEUMATIC TIRES.--This seems to be a very clever and
practical invention.

The bicycle-tape, and the mastic, and the dozen other devices for
mending punctured tires are all very well in their way, but they are not
absolutely reliable.

A punctured tire is a wounded tire, and needs the aid of a bicycle
doctor. All attempts at doing one's own surgery are likely to fail for
the simple reason that we are not experts in the business, and do not
always understand the extent of the damage.

The leak-stopper is merely a bandage to be applied to the wound till
help can be found. It consists of a strap of flexible material, provided
at one end with a buckle and at the other with a pair of tongues.

[Illustration: Leak-Stopper Bandage]

On the inside of the strap is some flexible air-tight material partly
fastened to the strap, and so arranged that it will entirely cover the
lips of the wound.

The edges are covered with adhesive material, and are firmly pressed on
either lip of the wound, drawing it together and covering it with
air-tight material, so that no air can escape.

The strap is then buckled round the tire, holding the ligature in place,
and the air can be pumped in and the rider proceed without fear of any
further difficulty.

[Illustration: Bicycle Propulsion]

BICYCLE PROPULSION.--So much has been invented for and said about
bicycles, that it seems strange that anything is left to say or to do,
yet here is a very novel idea. It is not so very long since wind and
water were the only motor powers, but those days are so clearly
superseded that it is quite a surprising suggestion that a wind-wheel
be attached to bicycles. Machinery connects it with the driving-wheel by
means of a rotary shaft, and the wind-wheel becomes an additional help.
This may prove a very useful contrivance for long-distance riders.

[Illustration: Embroidery Hoop]

EMBROIDERY HOOP.--There are surely among our readers some girls who
embroider and who have experienced difficulty with their embroidery
hoops. The inner hoop is sure to fit so tightly within the outer one
that if the material to be embroidered is at all thick, neither
persuasion nor force will make it slip into place. A new hoop is now
being made which can be adjusted for goods of any thickness. This is
done by means of a split binding-hoop, the two ends of which connect by
a screw-threaded bolt, and can be loosened or tightened at will, a nut
on the threaded end of the bolt holding the ends firmly in place.

      *       *       *       *       *

=S.T.A. Vertical Writing Pens=

[Illustration]

     =PRICES:=

     =Per Gross, $1.00; Per Dozen= (samples), =10 Cents=

Vertical writing demands a commercial pen. The "S.T.A." pens are strictly
a commercial pen, made after the famous models designed by John Jackson,
originator of the

     ------_System of Upright Writing._------

The desirability of teaching children, boys especially, to write with such
a pen as they will use in after life will be recognized by every good
teacher.

     _Introduced into the Schools of Denver, Colo., and elsewhere._

       *       *       *       *       *

     A great deal is expected of the teachers in our public
     schools at the present day in the way of keeping the pupils
     conversant with the political and scientific questions of
     the day. While this is as it should be, we believe that if
     parents would look well to the quality of reading-matter
     placed before their children better results would be
     obtained from the teachers' efforts in this line. THE GREAT
     ROUND WORLD, AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT, is the name of a
     newspaper for children, and without exception it is the
     finest one of its kind ever published. It comes in magazine
     form, and is overflowing with interesting subjects written
     in such a bright and yet simple manner that the whole
     household unwittingly becomes interested in it.--_Omer,
     Mich., Progress, Jan._ 8, 1897.

       *       *       *       *       *

Remember that text-books will
be taken in exchange for subscriptions
to

                 =THE= .. ..
              =GREAT ROUND WORLD=

       *       *       *       *       *

                   =FOR SALE=

          =10,000 STANDARD SCHOOL-BOOKS=
             (=MORE OR LESS DAMAGED=)

             At from 20 to 60 per cent.
            less than wholesale price. ..

     =2,000 COMPOSITION BOOKS= (retail price, 5 to 25 cents)
               =at 2 to 10 cents each.=

          =500 MAPS at half price or less.=

       *       *       *       *       *

  =GOODS removed from Old Store, 59 Fifth Avenue;=

                     NOW AT

         =NEW ADDRESS, 5 West 18th St.=

      =Mail orders promptly attended to.=
  =All books and material subject to approval.=

       *       *       *       *       *

        _To Any Subscriber Securing_

             For Us =1= _NEW_
                        _SUBSCRIPTION_

              _We Will Send, Post-Paid,
                A BOUND VOLUME OF ..._

               =THE GREAT ROUND WORLD=

     _These volumes are neatly bound in cloth, with title stamped
     on side and back, and make a neat library book, handy in
     size and weight, and tasteful in appearance._

    =PART I.= _contains_
       =NOVEMBER 11th, 1896 to FEBRUARY 18th, 1897=

    =PART II.= _contains_
       =FEBRUARY 25th, 1897 to JUNE 3d, 1897=

     ALBERT ROSS PARSONS, _President, American College of
     Musicians,_ writes concerning his son, aged 10: "The bound
     volume of the first fifteen numbers has remained his daily
     mental food and amusement ever since it arrived. I thank you
     for your great service both to our young people and to their
     elders."

       *       *       *       *       *

                            =THE GREAT ROUND WORLD=
                =3 & 5 WEST 18TH STREET       NEW YORK CITY=

       *       *       *       *       *

="The Great Round World" PRIZE CONTEST=

THE GREAT ROUND WORLD is now over six months old, and it feels some
anxiety to know just how much interest its readers have taken in the
news and how much information they have gained from its pages. To
ascertain this, it has been decided to offer ten prizes for the best
answers to the following:

     =Name ten of the most important events that have been mentioned in
     "The Great Round World" in the first 30 numbers, that is, up to
     number of June 3d.=

     _In mentioning these events give briefly reasons for considering
     them important._

This competition will be open to subscribers only, and any one desiring
to enter the competition must send to this office their name and the
date of their subscription; a number will then be given them.

All new subscribers will be furnished with a card entitling them to
enter the competition.

In making the selection of important events, remember that wars and
political events are not necessarily the most important. If, for
instance, the air-ship had turned out to be a genuine and successful
thing, it would have been most important as affecting the history of the
world. Or if by chance the telephone or telegraph had been invented in
this period, these inventions would have been _important_ events.

Prizes will be awarded to those who make the best selection and who
mention the events in the best order of their importance. Answers may be
sent in any time before September 1st.

The Great Round World does not want you to hurry over this contest, but
to take plenty of time and do the work carefully. It will be a pleasant
occupation for the summer months.

We would advise you to take the magazines starting at No. 1, look them
over carefully, keep a note-book at your side, and jot down in it the
events that seem to you important; when you have finished them all, No.
1 to 30, look over your notes and select the ten events that seem to you
to be the most important, stating after each event your reason for
thinking it important.

For instance: suppose you decide that the death of Dr. Ruiz was one of
these important events, you might say, "The killing of Dr. Ruiz in the
prison of Guanabacoa--because it brought the cruelties practised on
American citizens to the attention of our Government," etc., etc.

In sending your answers put your number and the date only on them, for
the judges are not to know names and addresses of the contestants, that
there may be no favoritism shown.

It is important to put date on, for if two or more are found of similar
standing, the one first received will be given preference.

Address all letters to REVIEW PRIZE CONTEST DEPARTMENT,
GREAT ROUND WORLD, 3 and 5 West 18th Street, New York City.

          _Write answer on one side of the paper only_
     =Prizes will be selections from the premium catalogue=

         No. 1. Premiums as given for 15 Subscriptions
         No. 2.    "      "   "    "  12        "
         No. 3.    "      "   "    "  10        "
         No. 4.    "      "   "    "   9        "
         No. 5.    "      "   "    "   8        "
         No. 6.    "      "   "    "   7        "
         No. 7.    "      "   "    "   5        "
         No. 8.    "      "   "    "   5        "
         No. 9.    "      "   "    "   5        "
         No. 10.   "      "   "    "   5        "





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is
Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 42, August 26, 1897, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD AND ***

***** This file should be named 15919.txt or 15919.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/5/9/1/15919/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.(www.pgdp.net)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

