The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is Going On
In It, Vol. 1, No. 26, May 6, 1897, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Great Round World and What Is Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 26, May 6, 1897
       A Weekly Magazine for Boys and Girls

Author: Various

Release Date: April 1, 2005 [EBook #15518]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD AND ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team. (www.pgdp.net)








_FIVE CENTS._

THE GREAT ROUND WORLD

AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT

    SUBSCRIPTION PRICE. MAY 6, 1897  Vol. 1. NO. 26
    $2.50 PER YEAR
    [Entered at Post Office, New York City, as second-class matter]

[Illustration]

    A WEEKLY NEWSPAPER FOR BOYS AND GIRLS

    WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON. PUBLISHER

    NO. 3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST. NEW YORK CITY

Copyright, 1897, by WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON.

    AS A
    =SPECIAL INDUCEMENT=

    for our subscribers to interest others in "The Great Round
    World," we will give to each subscriber who sends us $2.50 to
    pay for a year's subscription to a new name, a copy of

    =Rand, McNally & Co.=
      =1897 Atlas of the World.=

    =160 pages of colored maps from new plates, size 11 1/2 x 14
    inches, printed on special paper with marginal index, and well
    worth its regular price - - - - $2.50.=


Every one has some sort of an atlas, doubtless, but an old atlas is no
better than an old directory; countries do not move away, as do people,
but they do change and our knowledge of them increases, and this atlas,
made in 1897 from =new= plates, is perfect and up to date and covers every
point on

    =The Great Round World.=

Those not subscribers should secure the subscription of a friend and remit
$5 to cover it and their own. A copy of the atlas will be sent to either
address.

       *       *       *       *       *

GREAT ROUND WORLD,

_3 and 5 West 18th Street, . . . . . . . .New York City._


       *       *       *       *       *


THE GREAT ROUND WORLD
NATURAL HISTORY
STORIES.

A Series of True Stories

BY
JULIA TRUITT BISHOP.

Attractively Illustrated by Barnes.

       *       *       *       *       *

These stories will be issued in parts. Price, 10 cents each. Subscription
price (12 numbers), $1.00. Part 1. issued as supplement to GREAT ROUND
WORLD. NO. 20.

       *       *       *       *       *

    =Author's Preface.=

    The stories published in this little volume have been issued
    from time to time in the Philadelphia _Times_, and it is at the
    request of many readers that they now greet the world in more
    enduring form. They have been written as occasion suggested,
    during several years; and they commemorate to me many of the
    friends I have known and loved in the animal world. "Shep" and
    "Dr. Jim," "Abdallah" and "Brownie," "Little Dryad" and
    "Peek-a-Boo." I have been fast friends with every one, and have
    watched them with such loving interest that I knew all their
    ways and could almost read their thoughts. I send them on to
    other lovers of dumb animals, hoping that the stories of these
    friends of mine will carry pleasure to young and old.

       *       *       *       *       *

    =WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON,=
    =3 & 5 West 18th Street.=

       *       *       *       *       *


       *       *      *       *       *

_We hope that_ ...

=TEACHERS=

will avail themselves of the special trial subscription rate of =$1 a
year= before the time expires.

       *       *       *       *       *

GREAT ROUND WORLD,

3 and 5 West 18th Street, . . . . . . New York City.

       *       *       *       *       *

A great deal is expected of the teachers in our public schools at the
present day in the way of keeping the pupils conversant with the political
and scientific questions of the day. While this is as it should be, we
believe that if parents would look well to the quality of reading-matter
placed before their children better results would be obtained from the
teachers' efforts in this line. THE GREAT ROUND WORLD, AND WHAT IS
GOING ON IN IT, is the name of a newspaper for children, and without
exception it is the finest one of its kind ever published. It comes in
magazine form, and is overflowing with interesting subjects written in
such a bright and yet simple manner that the whole household unwittingly
becomes interested in it.--_Omer, Mich., Progress, Jan. 8, 1897._

       *       *       *       *       *

=THE . FIRST . BOUND . VOLUME=

OF

="The Great Round World"=

(Containing Nos. 1 to 15)

IS NOW READY.

    Handsomely bound in strong cloth, with title on side and back.
    Price, postage paid, $1.25. Subscribers may exchange their
    numbers by sending them to us (express paid) with 35 cents to
    cover cost of binding, and 10 cents for return carriage. Address

=_3 sad 5 West 18th Street,- - - -New York City._=

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE GREAT ROUND
WORLD
AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT.]

    VOL. 1   MAY 6, 1897.   NO. 26

       *       *       *       *       *

Now that the war between Greece and Turkey has really commenced, people
are much interested in comparing the strength of the two armies, and
wondering which side will gain the victory.

The Greek regular army numbers one hundred and twenty-five thousand, the
Turkish one hundred and fifty thousand. When all the reserves are called
out, it is thought that both countries can put twice if not three times as
many men in the field.

The Turkish army is considered the finer of the two, because it is so well
drilled, and so perfectly armed. It is said that German officers have been
teaching the Turkish soldiers the modern methods of war.

The Turks, however, are the weaker in two important points: their means of
providing food for their soldiers, and in facilities for carrying them
quickly from one point to another.

An army that is weak in these two very important points loses a good deal
of its usefulness.

As we have seen in Cuba, men cannot fight well when they are hungry. It
is also a fatal thing to have no good roads or railroads, along which
large bodies of men may be sent when they are needed.

The Greek army is not nearly so well drilled as the Turkish, nor so well
officered. The Turks have in Edhem Pasha a splendid leader, while the
Greeks have no great general to lead them, and at present no general who
seems even particularly clever. But that need not worry the friends of
Greece. The history of the world has taught us that every great occasion
has brought with it a great man capable of dealing with it. The French
Revolution brought forth Napoleon, the War of Independence gave us
Washington. We can therefore trust that what has happened before may occur
again, and that the Greek crisis may produce its Washington, to lead the
brave little country safely to success.

The great strength of the Greeks lies in their navy, which is one of the
finest in Europe. The Greek ships are modern, well manned, and well armed.
The Turkish navy, on the other hand, has been the joke of Europe for many
years.

Since the invention of the great guns that will send a cannon ball through
the side of a wooden ship as easily as you can pierce an egg-shell with a
needle, all the warships have been fitted with strong steel armored hulls
and water-tight compartments, such as we told you about on page 75 of Vol.
I. of THE GREAT ROUND WORLD.

Turkey has none of these new ships. She has been bankrupt for so many
years that she has not had the money to buy any of them.

It is supposed that the Turks will be more successful on land than the
Greeks, but that the Greek navy will win back on the sea as much as the
army loses on land.

It is also said that the Turkish arrangements for feeding the soldiers are
so bad, that, if the war runs on into months instead of weeks, the Turks
will not be able to hold out.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Senate has not yet taken any action on the Cuban Bill.

Senator Morgan again brought it before the House, hoping that he would be
able to bring it to a vote. He was, however, obliged to agree to hold it
over for a day or two until Senator Hale should be able to be present, as
Mr. Hale has some very important things he wishes to say on the subject.

From Cuba there is very little news of interest.

Much indignation is felt against General Weyler, because he has sent out
soldiers to destroy the Cuban hospitals, and in the last few days several
have been burned and the sick soldiers in them murdered.

The Cubans are not able to have large hospitals, because they cannot spare
a sufficient number of men to protect them, so they have been in the habit
of building huts in the forests, where they would leave a few wounded men,
in the charge of one or two nurses.

These forest hospitals are not guarded. The Cubans have trusted to the
woods to conceal them from the enemy.

It seems that the Spaniards have found out the secret of the hospitals,
and now General Weyler has sent out parties to make a careful search for
them.

As soon as a hut is found the invalids are put to death and the nurses
taken prisoner.

To fire upon or in any way attack a hospital is against the rules of
civilized warfare, and this new horror of General Weyler's adds one more
to the long list of his crimes.

       *        *        *        *        *

The Mississippi River has not begun to subside yet, and the floods grow
daily more serious, as fresh levees give way, and allow the waters to flow
over new districts.

There is, however, some hope that the greatest height of the flood wave
has been reached, and that the angry waters may begin to go back in a few
days.

There is still fear that the city of New Orleans may be swept by the
flood.

       *        *        *        *        *

The vexed question of the Bering Sea seal fisheries is coming up again.

The Bering Sea divides America from Asia, and is bordered on the American
side by the State of Alaska, and on the Asiatic side by Siberia.

Up to the year 1867, Alaska, or Aliaska, as it was called, belonged to the
Russian Government.

In that year it was sold to the United States for $7,200,000.

At the time of the purchase Alaska was looked upon as a very barren land;
no one ever dreamt that gold and silver and other valuable minerals would
be found in it. The money spent for the purchase was seriously begrudged
by many people, and Mr. Seward, the Secretary of State who had made the
bargain, was much blamed, people saying that it was a foolish waste of
the public money.

The one source of income which Alaska was known to possess in those days
was its seal fisheries. A great herd of fur-bearing seals lived in the
Alaskan waters, and the Government expected to make these seals very
profitable to it.

Under the Russian rule, the fur seal regions had been very carefully
protected, and when the United States bought Alaska the Government decided
to care for the animals in the same way that the Russians had done,
allowing only a certain number of seals to be killed each year.

The fisheries were leased to a company called the Alaska Commercial
Company of San Francisco, which had the entire rights to them, under
certain rules and regulations laid down by the Government.

Soon after Alaska and its seal fisheries came into the possession of the
United States, English and American vessels--the latter not belonging to
the Commercial Company--entered the Bering Sea, and slaughtered any seals
they could reach, without regard to the proper rules for seal fishing.

The Company complained to the Government, and in 1887 this seal poaching
had become such a serious matter that the United States ordered her
revenue cutters up to Bering Sea to protect her interests.

Several ships were captured by the revenue-officers, and most of them were
British vessels.

This opened the way for the dispute between Great Britain and the United
States, which has been going on ever since, and has been one of the most
troublesome questions our rulers have had to deal with.

Great Britain claimed that she had a perfect right to fish in Bering Sea,
and the United States insisted that she had bought all the rights to the
fishing when she bought Alaska.

After the quarrel had dragged on for five years, it was finally, in 1892,
decided to arbitrate it.

The Committee appointed for this purpose met in Paris, France, in 1893,
and finally decided that Russia had never had any rights in the Bering
Sea, beyond the usual rights which all countries have of controlling the
seas for three miles out from their borders.

Beyond the three-mile limit, the ocean becomes the "high seas," and is
then open to anybody.

It was decided that Russia could not sell the Bering Sea to the United
States.

The matter being thus decided, the question of caring for the seals was
left as unsettled as ever, and it was most necessary that some arrangement
should be made, unless the seals were to be totally destroyed.

The decision at Paris made it necessary that Great Britain should be
willing to agree to any plan that should be adopted.

It was therefore shown to the Committee that the seal flocks were in
danger of being destroyed, and a set of laws was made that proper care
might be taken of the seals. England and the United States agreed to obey
these laws, and it was decided that they should go into effect at once.

As it was supposed that in course of time it might be wise to alter these
laws, it was further agreed between England and the United States that
they should be looked over every five years, and changed if it was
necessary.

The five years has still sixteen months to run, but the American
Government has thought it advisable to ask that the two countries meet and
talk the subject over once more, as the laws are not strong enough to
protect the seals.

The United States complains now that Canadian and British fishers are
killing the seals in the same careless, ignorant way that they did before
the Treaty of Paris, and that unless they are stopped there will be no
seals in Alaska in a very few years.

The Government says that the habits of the seals must be studied and
understood, so that they may be protected, in order that all the fur
necessary for market may be obtained, without interfering with the growth
of the herds.

Every year the seals arrive in flocks hundreds of thousands strong, and
seek a sandy beach, or some nice sunny rocks, where they can spend the
summer. In these places they establish rookeries, or villages, as they are
sometimes called.

The fathers of the families come first, arriving in April to seek out
comfortable quarters.

In June the mothers come to the island, take possession of the homes
provided for them, and pretty soon each seal mother has a nice little seal
pup to occupy her home with her.

It is a curious thing about these little seal pups that though they are
going to spend their lives in the water, they don't like the idea of it at
all, and have to be forced into the water by their mothers, and taught to
swim just as though they were little boys and girls.

Baby seals have nearly white fur when they are born, and, strange to say,
until this coat falls off and the dark one comes, their mothers never
attempt to take them to the water.

The seals are not the gentle things they appear to be, with their soft
brown eyes and their sleek coats. On the contrary, they are very fierce
and warlike if any attempt is made to interfere with their families.

When the fathers first reach the beach, and set about making the home
ready for their families, they will not allow any of the young bachelor
seals to land near the rookeries. They force them either to remain in the
water, or to go to the highlands above the village.

The bachelor seals think they have as much right to a comfortable home as
the older seals, and so they fight hard to enter the villages.

This fighting keeps up the whole summer while the seals are out of the
water, and those who have seen these battles say that "night and day, the
sound of them is like that of an approaching railway train."

So steadily does the fighting continue that the old seals have no time to
eat, and during the three or four months they stay with their families on
the beaches they never take a mouthful of food. At the end of the time,
when they leave the rookeries, they are thin and miserable, and covered
with battle scars.

The killing of the seals should be carefully arranged with a knowledge of
these habits.

The proper rules are that no mother seals, baby seals, or father seals
shall be killed, but that the hunters shall watch until the badly behaved
bachelor seals have got tired with fighting, and gone up above the
rookeries to rest. The hunters ought then to creep in between the seals
and the water, and making a noise to frighten them drive them inland.

Every hunter should be armed with a wooden club, and when he has chosen a
seal that seems to be about two or three years old, he should strike it
with this club and kill it.

In this way a large number of seals can be obtained without disturbing the
rest of the flock.

The manner of killing that the United States complains of is that the
hunters creep into the rookeries and kill the mother seals, leaving the
poor little pups to die by thousands for want of their mothers' care.

Because of this wholesale killing of the seals, there are few young seals
left to grow up in the place of those that have been taken away, and so
after a time there will be no more flocks at all.

The sealskin which we use is made out of the under fur of the animal. The
seals which are caught for fur have a very thick, velvet-like undercoat,
covered with a quantity of long hair, which has to be removed from the
skins before they can be used for market.

The roots of these long hairs grow much deeper into the skin than those of
the short, thick fur, and so the pelts can be laid face downward, and
pared away very carefully at the back until the roots of the long hairs
are cut through. The long hairs are then pulled out of the skin, and the
beautiful soft fur is left.

It is to be hoped that, in the discussion of this matter between England
and the United States, the proper rules for killing the seals may be very
strictly laid down, that they may be enforced. It will be too bad if this
splendid fur is lost through ignorance and carelessness.

       *        *        *        *        *

Another of the old questions that have vexed our Government is being
brought to the front again. This one is the annexation of the Hawaiian
Islands.

The reason why this subject has come up again is that the Japanese have
been emigrating to these islands in such vast numbers of late, that an
invasion is feared, and the Government is anxious to have American
protection.

A little while ago word was sent that the Hawaiians had turned back four
hundred Japanese emigrants who sought to land at Honolulu. Japan
immediately sent war-ships to inquire into the matter, and the United
States also sent a cruiser.

It soon became evident that the affair was much more serious than at first
appeared.

The Japanese have been emigrating to Hawaii in such vast numbers that,
unless something is done to stop them, there will soon be more Japanese
than natives in the islands.

The Government of Hawaii, awakening to the danger that threatened, has
made fresh advances to the United States, asking once more to be annexed
to this country.

This question of annexation has been talked about since the year 1893.

In January, 1893, there was a revolution in Hawaii, because the people had
found cause to dislike their queen, Liliuokalani. This queen's behavior
had been very bad, and her rule had been a disgrace to the islands for
some time. At last the people would stand it no longer, and so removed her
from the throne.

The people who revolted against the Queen were either Americans or people
born of American parents settled in Hawaii.

They formed a government, and after many troubles asked the United States
to take possession of the Hawaiian Islands, and, in return, to pay over
$3,000,000 of debts which Hawaii had contracted, and a yearly income of
$20,000 to the deposed queen, and also a lump sum of $150,000 to her
daughter, Princess Kaulani.

Mr. Cleveland, who was President, opposed the idea of taking possession of
the islands, and endeavored to restore Queen Liliuokalani to her throne.

His efforts were not successful. The Hawaiians would not have her back,
and having had time to establish a government for themselves, they felt as
if they could do without the United States as well as their dark-skinned
Queen. So the question of annexing the islands fell through.

Now it is before us again with greater force than before.

It is evident that if we don't want Hawaii, Japan does, and the time is
drawing near when some decided step must be taken.

The Japanese plan for securing Hawaii seems to be similar to the English
plan for getting possession of the Transvaal.

It seems to be their idea to fill the islands with Japanese, until the
number of Asiatics is far greater than that of the Hawaiians. Then they
will demand a voice in the government, and when once they have secured
that, it will be only a question of time when they will have the
government of the islands under their control.

The people of Hawaii became suspicious of this plot when they found that
the Japanese who came over in such hordes (sometimes as many as fifteen
hundred in one week), were not laborers seeking work, as is the case with
most immigrants.

It was found that the new arrivals belonged to the student class, and that
after they arrived in the islands, they made no attempt to get anything to
do, but seemed to be living on their incomes.

This made the Hawaiians suspicious that these emigrants were being sent
over at the expense of their Government, and that the Mikado was
supporting them until he had gained his ends, and secured the islands for
himself.

Just lately there was a scare of fever in Honolulu, the port of Hawaii,
and the baggage of the incoming people had to be carefully fumigated.
While doing this work the officers found to their surprise that nearly
every Japanese immigrant had a soldier's uniform done up in his baggage.

The Government does not know what to make of this, but has become so
thoroughly alarmed that it is seeking the protection of the United States.

A prominent lawyer from Honolulu has come over here to assist the
officials who are already in Washington laying their case before our
Government.

The Japanese treat the matter very lightly, and pretend that it is a
foolish scare that amounts to nothing. They insist, however, that the
Japanese immigrants shall not be turned back from Hawaii but allowed to
land, as they have a right to do, according to the treaty existing between
Hawaii and Japan.

       *        *        *        *        *

Some fresh news has come about the uprising in Brazil.

The insurgents it would seem are led by a man named Antonio Conselhiero,
who appears to be a very extraordinary kind of person.

He first made his appearance last November, when one day he marched
through the streets of a small town in Bahia, followed by a well-drilled,
orderly band of men and women.

These people went through the streets singing the old songs and hymns of
the empire, and every now and then they would halt, and Conselhiero would
address the crowd that gathered around him.

From the descriptions of him that have been sent from Brazil, he seems to
be an enormously tall man, with black eyes, and long black hair and beard.
He is broad and big as well as tall, and looks like a giant.

He seemed to have such an influence over the crowds who listened to his
words, that they flocked to his standard, and followed him, promising to
help him in his crusade against the government, and his attempt to restore
the monarchy.

The Governor ordered the police to send the crowds back to their homes,
and drive Conselhiero and his band out of the city. But this was easier
said than done. The strange man's followers, women as well as men,
attacked the police, killing some, and wounding many.

Then Conselhiero made his way to a mountain, where he encamped with his
followers, and prepared to defy the authorities.

The Governor, still thinking the whole affair was but an insignificant
riot, sent a small body of soldiers after the insurgents, with orders to
make them break up their camp and move off.

When the soldiers arrived at Conselhiero's encampment, they made very
light of being sent out to disperse a body of tramps and vagabonds.

Their amusement did not last long. A number of women, armed with heavy
swords, rushed out upon them, and attacked them so furiously that they
were forced to run for their lives.

More troops were sent out by the Governor, and three times were they
beaten by Conselhiero's strange army of women and men.

The authorities refused to believe that there was anything serious in
these defeats, and persisted in thinking "the fanatics," as Conselhiero's
followers are called, a parcel of crazy lunatics who would soon come to
their senses.

At last when it was found that Conselhiero was preaching the return of the
monarchy to the people, and that peasants and soldiers were alike flocking
to his standard, in the hope of seeing a prince on the throne of Brazil,
they began to see that this man was by no means crazy, but that he was a
very serious enemy who must be seriously treated.

There is a very strong wish in the hearts of many Brazilians for the
return of the monarchy, and numbers of influential people are joining
Conselhiero, who is gaining ground every day.

The revolution has indeed gained such a strong hold in Brazil that it
will be a very difficult task to put it down.

       *        *        *        *        *

The Greater Republic of Central America does not seem to be having a very
pleasant time of it.

If you remember, it was only recognized by our Government in December
last, and already there is trouble.

On page 220 of Vol. I we told you that the Greater Republic of Central
America was formed by the union of the three republics of Honduras, San
Salvador, and Nicaragua.

Now there is a revolution in Honduras; one of those toy revolutions we
spoke about in No. 22 of THE GREAT ROUND WORLD.

In all the small South American Republics, revolution and rebellion is as
the breath of life to the people.

If a general gets popular with his soldiers he at once plots to overthrow
the government, and with the help of the army become president himself.

Every man who is either clever or ambitious gets up a toy revolution to
depose somebody, and take his place.

The present revolution appears to be of the usual kind.

The President has become unpopular, and it is said that one of the former
presidents, Dr. Soto, thinks he would like to have another term of office,
and so he has incited the people to revolt.

A new government has been formed to take charge of affairs until they
become more settled, and things seem to be shaping themselves to suit the
doctor's wishes.

San Salvador and Guatemala, though by their new ties they are bound to
assist their sister republic, have declined to interfere, and it looks as
if the life of the Greater Republic of Central America would not be nearly
as long as its name.

       *        *        *        *        *

On page 134 of Vol. I. we spoke about the unfortunate Russians who are
exiled to Siberia, and of the thousands of miles they are forced to march
across the continent before they reach their place of punishment.

It has just been reported that the Czar has issued a decree that persons
who are exiled to Siberia shall, from this time forth, be carried by train
to the convict settlements.

In the days when the poor unfortunates had to make the journey on foot it
took ninety days of steady marching to reach the journey's end, and women
and children as well as men took their places in the long, sad procession
that wound its way across the dreary steppes of Russia.

This decree must have caused much rejoicing among the Russian people, and
if the Czar continues to rule his people so mercifully and kindly, we may
all live to see the day when there will be no more Nihilism or hatred
between the ruler and the ruled in Russia, and when it will no longer be
necessary to send anybody to Siberia.

       *        *        *        *        *

The boys of the Cambridge Manual Training School have a new lesson which
has become very popular with them.

This is a fire drill.

The pupils are taught to go through the whole process of fighting a fire
in the same way that the firemen do.

Before the boys are allowed to join the fire battalion they have to be
drilled, taught to march, and are obliged to attend lectures on surgery,
and how to help injured people until the doctor comes.

After the boys have gone through this first course of study, they begin
their real fireman's training. They attend more lectures in which they
learn how to handle the various ladders and machines which firemen use.
They have to learn how a fire engine is put together, what are the uses of
every wheel and valve, and how to clean and care for each separate part of
the engine; and when they are quite familiar with the various things used
by firemen they pass on to the last stage of training.

This begins on March 1st, and from this time on the work is done out of
doors.

A wooden building forty feet high, and provided with doors and windows
exactly like a three-story house, is put up in the schoolyard, and it is
with this building that the lessons are given.

Every Thursday afternoon an imaginary fire takes place in it. The hose is
run out, the ladders are raised, and the lads go to work with a will,
saving imaginary lives, and fighting imaginary flames.

Each week some new complication is supposed to take place, and some extra
machine has to be brought into use, until by the end of the school term
they can handle every machine and ladder with the greatest ease.

When first the fire drill was introduced into the school, the boys were
not obliged to take the study unless they wanted to; but it has become so
popular that they are eager and anxious to take it, and now is part of the
regular course of the school for all boys who are strong enough to stand
the hard work it necessitates.

       *        *        *        *        *

Some time ago we talked about the moving of the village of Katonah. Our
friends in California can do better than that. While New York moves
houses, California moves mountains.

A dam is being built at San Diego, Cal., to gather water for the city.
Where the water supply for a city is not quite sufficient, darns are often
built, to stop small rivers from flowing away to waste; and the water
gathered by the barrier of wood, stone, or earth, as the case may be, is
turned into the city to be used by the people.

In the San Diego work, a huge mass of rocky hillside overhung the canon
which was to be dammed, and at the bottom of which the river flowed.

A canon is, as you doubtless know, a deep gorge or ravine, formed by the
river that flows through it, and which little by little has worn away its
bed until it has cut deep down into the heart of the land, hundreds of
feet below its original level.

As we have said, the plan for the San Diego work was to build a dam across
the canon, and keep the waters from flowing away.

The engineers thought that if they could only take this huge mass of rocky
hill and drop it into the canon, it would make their work very much
easier, as the task of getting enough stone down to the bottom of the
gorge to build their dam was by no means an easy one.

They thought the matter out, and finally decided to try and move the
mountain-side into the canon.

They laid their plans, and for two months were busy preparing for the
great move.

They tunnelled the hillside in all directions over the section which they
desired to move, and in these tunnels laid mines of giant powder or
dynamite.

These mines they connected with electric wires, and when all was ready,
the various wires were gathered into one bunch, and taken across the gorge
that was to be filled up.

When the explosion was about to take place the workmen and engineers moved
ever so far away, until they were at a safe distance from the explosion,
and one man, the foreman, was sent to the edge of the canon to touch the
wires, and start the firing of the mines.

When he received the signal he touched the wire, and then ran away to
safety as fast as he could go, while the others watched the explosion.

It seems to have been a most wonderful sight.

Bowlders and masses of rock rose from their beds on the hillside, and
little tongues of dust and smoke shot out from the earth in all
directions. Then there was a terrific growl, which seemed to come from the
heart of the mountain, the earth shook, the men who were watching were
thrown to the ground, and with a roar and a rattle the side of the
mountain moved and began to fall.

There was a shower of stones which continued to fall for over an hour, and
the dust was so thick that it was impossible to see; but when it finally
cleared, it was found that an enormous slice of the side of the mountain
had been blown into the canon below.

The engineers said that one hundred and fifty thousand tons of rock had
been moved, and to their great pride they found that it had fallen exactly
according to their plans, and had bridged the canon and formed the bulwark
for the support of the dam.

       *        *        *        *        *

The past week has been one of great anxiety for Greece and the Greek
cause.

The Turks have been steadily gaining ground in the East; they have swarmed
through the pass of Milouna into the plains of Thessaly.

The Greeks fought nobly, and succeeded in driving the Turks a little way
back toward Milouna, but the vast army of Turkey was too strong for them,
and despite their efforts, the enemy has made its way into Greece, and
advanced upon the city of Larissa.

The mayors and governors of Thessaly have called on the peasants and all
men capable of bearing arms to come to the defence of their country, and
volunteers are flocking in every hour.

The latest news that has reached us states that the Greeks have finally
fallen back to Pharsalia, leaving Larissa at the mercy of the Turks.

Now while this looks very badly for the Greeks, and at this time it seems
as if their ultimate defeat were sure, it is too soon to offer any very
decided opinion.

It may all be a part of a very deep-laid plan of the Greeks.

It must be remembered that the weak points of the Turkish army in regard
to provisions and transportation are as well known to the Greeks as to us.
The farther the Turks can be enticed away from the place where they keep
their stores, the weaker they grow. The Greeks may have planned to lure
them over the border, and away from their supplies, and then fight them
when they have them at a disadvantage.

This looks the more likely when it is taken into consideration that the
Greeks have been successful in invading Turkey and reaching Elassona, the
Turkish headquarters, and that they also hold the Pass of Reveni.

The Greek navy has been doing some very fine work, bombarding and
destroying towns on the east coast, as well as the west.

The Greek army which was pressing on to the Turkish city of Janina in
Epirus has met with a severe reverse.

With information of the defeat comes news that is of such great importance
to the Greek cause that the present check may prove to be of very little
importance.

This news is that the Albanians have risen against their masters the
Turks, and joined with the Greeks.

Albania was at one time a part of Greece, but that was in the early
history of the Empire. It at last secured its freedom and became an
independent country.

In 1478 the Turks conquered Albania, and it has been under Turkish rule
ever since. The Albanians have no love for the Turks, and though they are
supposed to be obedient to the Sultan's wishes, he does not dare to
appoint any but native Albanians to govern them. The people have always
contrived to give him all the trouble possible.

The Greeks hoped that the Albanians would join them, as well as the
Macedonians, and so, despite the reverses that the week has brought, with
these powerful friends to help them, they must be feeling more sure of
success than they were a few days ago.

Bulgaria is also becoming restless and making demands of the Sultan,
threatening to revolt against him if he does not give them what they ask
for.

The Prince of Bulgaria has made a trip to Berlin to borrow money for the
war. And it is likely that the Sultan may soon have so many enemies to
fight that he will wish the Powers had allowed him to arrange the Cretan
matters for himself, without interfering and bringing this hornet's nest
about his ears.

                                     GENIE H. ROSENFELD.




INVENTION AND DISCOVERY.


With the summer coming on, inventions for swimmers are being brought
forward.

The WATER SKATE or shoe is to afford a new and very delightful
means of sport.

It is intended to be used when the swimmer is in the upright position
assumed in treading water. A swimmer can maintain this position for a long
time, but can ordinarily make no headway in the water.

[Illustration]

The water skate is invented to enable him to strike out with his feet as
in walking. Under the skate there are two "fins." These remain pressed
together with the forward movement of the foot, but with the same movement
as the hands take in swimming. These fins open out as the foot reaches the
limit of its stride, and push back the water exactly in the same way that
the arms do.

It is claimed that a high rate of speed can be obtained with this water
skate.

CANOPY FOR BICYCLES.--All cyclers complain so of the heat of the
sun, that busy brains are at work to find a means of protecting the riders
from the fierce heat.

A canopy has just been invented, which seems to be the most practical and
sensible of any of the coverings offered.

It has a pointed roof to it, and spreads over the rider at a distance that
in no way obstructs the view.

[Illustration]

One great advantage of this canopy is that it is firmer than any other
kind so far suggested.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PORTABLE FIRE-ESCAPE is an invention that should recommend
itself to every one. It is small enough to be easily carried, and is so
arranged that the person using it to let himself down from a burning
building can control the rate of speed at which he descends, and avoid all
danger of a sudden fall.

It is firmly hooked on to a clamp that is provided with it, and it
consists of a seat attached to two pulleys, through which the ropes pass.

The person seeking to escape from the fire places himself on the seat,
and, grasping the pulley firmly, lets himself out of the window. By means
of an attachment he is able, as we have said, to regulate the speed of his
descent.

[Illustration]

This invention ought to be of great service to all those who live in high
buildings.

    G.H.R.




LETTERS FROM OUR YOUNG FRIENDS.


    DEAR EDITOR:

    Being a great reader of your paper, I of course felt inclined to
    send you some praise, as you deserve it. I am more interested in
    Cuba than in the affairs of Crete. I have been to see the new
    Library, and consider it the finest in the world. Hoping much
    success to the paper, I remain,

                            Your interested reader,
                                        NATALIE C.
    WASHINGTON, D.C.



DEAR NATALIE:

Your letter was received with much pleasure.

                                 EDITOR.


    DEAR EDITOR:

    My teacher, Miss Galbraith, takes your paper, and I used to be
    looking for it; at last I bought it myself, so I could own it.

    Your paper is very interesting and helpful in Geography. All my
    family are interested in THE GREAT ROUND WORLD,
    especially my father.

    Will you please tell me if General Maceo is dead or not? We got
    so many different stories it is hard to tell which is true. Or
    if General Rivera is to be put to death?

    I live in New Haven; it is a beautiful city, full of elm trees,
    with parks. Also Yale College, from which Nathan Hale and Samuel
    Morse graduated.

                                    Your Reader,
                                        JOHN C.
    NEW HAVEN, CONN.

    P.S.--I am glad that you don't publish prize-fights. It is the
    nature of animals, not human beings.



DEAR JOHN:

There is no longer any doubt that General Maceo was killed. The stories
that he was still alive were probably made up by the Cubans, for fear
their countrymen might lose heart if they knew the truth.

You will see in this number of your paper that General Rivera is not to be
shot, according to the present reports.              EDITOR.


    DEAR EDITOR:

    I enjoy THE GREAT ROUND WORLD immensely, and look
    forward to its coming every week. I like to read about Greece
    and Cuba, and if I were Grecian I would gladly join in the war.
    I hope Greece will win, for I pity the poor Cretans under the
    cruel rule of Turkey. Wishing your paper many years of success,
    I am,

                                Your friend and reader,
                                              HAROLD R.
    NEW YORK, April 8th, 1897


DEAR HAROLD:

Many thanks for your pretty letter. Write to us again soon.
                                              EDITOR.

    DEAR MR. EDITOR:

    I want to ask you about the _Cometa_. Did the Admiral ever bring
    her into the Havana harbor as he boasted that he would, with
    flags flying on her?

    Do you think Cuba is going to win? I hope that she will.

    Are the Americans going to help them?--and then I know the
    Cubans will win. Yours truly,

                                        SYDNEY G.
    BALTIMORE, April 9th, 1897.

MY DEAR SYDNEY:

The Spanish Admiral has never brought the _Cometa_ into Havana harbor. He
was just spinning a sailor's yarn, apparently.

We hope that Cuba will win her freedom, and it seems very likely that she
will.

You will see in this number of THE GREAT ROUND WORLD that there
is a chance that the President will try to settle the troubles between
Cuba and Spain.

                                                     EDITOR.


    DEAR EDITOR:

    Our teacher takes THE GREAT ROUND WORLD and reads
    to us whenever the time will permit. The reading makes an
    interesting part of the exercises of the day. We are all anxious
    to hear about the war between Cuba and Spain, and we hope Cuba
    will soon be free. Can you tell us about how many people pass
    over Brooklyn Bridge in a day? I think it is wonderful how
    buttons and such articles are made out of milk. Do they have
    schools in Freeville? I think we should all be grateful for the
    interesting news that is printed for us in your paper each week.

                                     Yours truly,
                                             NELLIE R.
    TIFFIN, OHIO, March 24th, 1897.



DEAR NELLIE:

We are glad that you like THE GREAT ROUND WORLD. Why don't you
try and get it for yourself by becoming one of our agents? You can get
your own paper free of charge for two subscriptions, and it would be very
nice to own it yourself, and be able to read it whenever you wanted to.

In Freeville the children are taught to work.

You ask about the number of persons who cross the Brooklyn Bridge daily.
Mr. Martin, the Chief Engineer and Superintendent, has been so kind as to
tell us all about it for you. We publish his note.

                                                   EDITOR.

One hundred and twenty-five thousand people per day ride across the bridge
in the cars. Twelve thousand walk over on the promenade. Five thousand
vehicles cross the bridge on the roadways.--C.C. MARTIN, Chief Engineer
and Superintendent.

       *       *       *       *       *

    A Good Agent
    Wanted
    In Every Town
    for
    "The Great Round World"

       *       *       *       *       *


    That Rust

    ON YOUR WHEEL CAN BE
    TAKEN OFF IN TWO MINUTES
    WITH A RAG AND
    SOME

    Great Round
    World Polisher

    PRICE
    25 CENTS

    FOR SALE BY ALL DEALERS

    *        *        *        *        *

    EXAMINATIONS

    Have you thought of the Relief Maps for examination work?
    Are you following from day to day the war in the East?

    Klemm's Relief Practice Maps

    especially adapted to examination work, as they are perfectly free
    from all political details. Any examination work may be done on them.

    For following the Eastern Question use Klemm's Roman Empire, and
    record each day's events. Small flags attached to pins, and
    moved on a map as the armies move, keep the details before you
    in a most helpful way, especially when you use the Relief Maps.

    SAMPLE SET, RELIEF MAPS (15), $1.00
    SAMPLE ROMAN EMPIRE, - 10 CENTS

    WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON, - - 5 West 18th Street, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *
Which Is Your Favorite

_BICYCLE_

You have your choice of any wheel in the market if you send us one hundred
regular subscriptions to the

"Great Round World"

Show the paper to your friends, and you will soon find one hundred people
who will be glad to subscribe. Send the subscriptions in to us as fast as
received, and when the one hundredth, reaches us you can go to ANY dealer
YOU choose, buy ANY wheel YOU choose, and we will pay the bill.

Six-months' subscriptions will be counted as one-half, three-months' as
one-quarter,

_SAMPLE COPIES WILL BE FURNISHED AT HALF PRICE. (SEE OTHER OFFERS)_

Great Round World
3 and 5 West 18th Street, New York City





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is
Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 26, May 6, 1897, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD AND ***

***** This file should be named 15518.txt or 15518.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/5/5/1/15518/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team. (www.pgdp.net)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
