The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Good Resolution, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Good Resolution

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: February 8, 2004 [EBook #10994]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOOD RESOLUTION ***




Produced by Garrett Alley and PG Distributed Proofreaders




THE

GOOD RESOLUTION.

[Illustration]

REVISED BY D.P. KIDDER


FOR THE SUNDAY-SCHOOL UNION OF THE METHODIST EPISCOPAL CHURCH, 200
MULBERRY-STREET.


1831.




THE GOOD RESOLUTION.


"Why am I so unhappy to-day?" said Isabella Gardner, as she opened her
eyes on the morning of her fourteenth birth-day. "Is it because the sun
is not bright enough, or the flowers are not sweet enough?" she added,
as she looked on the glorious sunshine that lay upon the rose-bushes
surrounding her window.

Isabella arose, and dressed herself, and tried to drive away her
uncomfortable feelings, by thinking of the pleasures of the afternoon,
when some of her young friends were to assemble to keep her birth-day.
But she could not do it; and, sad and restless, she walked in her
father's garden, and seated herself on a little bench beneath a shady
tree. Everything around was pleasant; the flowers seemed to send up
their gratitude to Heaven in sweetness, and the little birds in songs of
joy. All spoke peace and love, and Isabella could find nothing there
like discontent or sorrow. The cause of her present troubled feelings
was to be found within.

Isabella Gardner was in the habit of indulging in a fretful and peevish
temper. She was often "hasty in her spirit to be angry;" forgetting that
the wise Solomon says, "Anger resteth in the bosom of fools;" and that a
greater than Solomon had commanded her to forgive, as she would be
forgiven.

Her disrespect and ill-humor toward her parents had caused her many
unhappy days and sleepless nights; and often had the day closed on
faults unrepented of, and sins unforgiven. It was but the afternoon
before that she had spoken in a high angry tone to her eldest sister,
Mary, and parted in displeasure from her brother Edward, because he
would not leave his studies to go into the garden with her. Thus had the
"sun gone down upon her wrath;" and we cannot be surprised that when it
rose in the morning she was unhappy.

Isabella had a generous temper; and after she had been unkind or unjust,
she was frequently sorry, and determined to be so no more; but her
regret was forgotten as soon as she was again tempted; and at the age
of thirteen she had gained no victory over the sinful habit of indulging
in an angry temper.

Isabella had kind and indulgent parents;--parents who looked with
thankfulness upon the virtues, and with sorrow upon the faults, of their
children, and prayed that the former might be strengthened, and the
latter corrected. Mrs. Gardner had long seen with deep anxiety the
growing defect in Isabella's temper, and it was now brought more
painfully home to her feelings, as she reflected how much an added year
increased the responsibility of her child.

She had risen early, and had been long engaged in prayer to Him who can
alone regulate the unruly dispositions, wills, and passions of sinful
men. She prayed for knowledge of her duty to her child, and for
strength to perform it: she prayed for Isabella, that God would convince
her of the error of her way; that his Holy Spirit might renew her in the
spirit of her mind, that she might become a child and follower of the
Lord Jesus Christ.

Long and anxiously the pious mother continued her supplications at the
throne of grace; and after taking her Bible, and reading the blessed
assurance, "I can do all things through Christ strengthening me," she
went into the garden to meet Isabella. She found her there, sitting as
we have described, alone and sorrowful. "What is the matter, Isabella,"
said Mrs. Gardner, in a kind tone: "why are you so sad on the morning of
your birth-day?"

[Illustration]

"I don't know, mother," replied Isabella; "I believe it is because
nobody loves me."

"Isabella," said Mrs. Gardner, "I am afraid nobody will love you long if
you go on as you have done lately, giving way to angry feelings whenever
anything opposes your wishes; and, what is much worse, you will offend
your heavenly Father, if you thus continue to break his holy commands."

"I can't help being displeased, mother, when people show me that they
don't like me, and try to vex me."

"Seldom does any one vex us on purpose, Isabella. It is the bad state of
our own hearts that makes us think we are not liked; and, besides, Jesus
Christ has forbidden us to be angry even when there are real faults. He
tells us to forgive others, as he has forgiven us; and do you think you
have obeyed him?"

"No, mother; but people must be angry when they are treated unfairly;
and the girls at school are often very unkind and unjust to me; and I am
sure I ought to show them that I don't like it."

"Such is not the gospel rule, Isabella; and that alone should be your
guide. There you are directed to love those who treat you unkindly, to
do good to those that hate you, and to 'pray for those who despitefully
use you.' The recollection of your own need of forgiveness from God,
ought to make you patient toward the faults of others."

"Very often, mother, when I try to do my best, I am misunderstood, and
reproved; and then I am sure even the best persons would be displeased."

"Not if they are disciples of the Lord Jesus Christ, Isabella. Was he
not holy and undefiled, pure, spotless, and without sin? and was he not
persecuted, falsely accused, and scourged? reviled and rejected by men,
betrayed by one disciple, and forsaken by all the rest? Yet no word of
evil passion was ever heard from him. He opened not his mouth, nor would
he suffer another to resent any of the insults offered to him. 'The
disciple is not above his Master;' and if we profess to follow Jesus
Christ, we must learn to bear all things, and try 'to be perfect, as our
Father in heaven is perfect.'

"Forgiveness of injuries is a high duty, and patiently to bear injustice
is one of the greatest Christian excellences. God alone can give us the
right temper of mind, but we must ourselves try to attain it. Perhaps
you may recollect what Peter says about suffering patiently for
well-doing. To be sure, those to whom he was preaching were suffering in
a great cause; but the conquest of our faults is a great cause to us;
and we may all apply his words to our own cases. He was preaching to the
Christians at Pontus, who were enduring persecution in the cause of
Christ,--'For what glory is it, if, when ye be buffeted for your faults,
ye shall take it patiently? but if, when ye do well, and suffer for it,
ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God.'" 1 Pet. ii, 20.

Isabella, as usual, acknowledged her error, and said she would try to
correct it.

"Do you know, Isabella," said Mrs. Gardner, "that you have promised me
this a great many times before?"

"Yes, mother."

"And do you know that, by thus repeatedly breaking your promises, you
add to the sins already committed?"

"Yes, mother."

"And do you know, my child, the reason why you cannot keep your
promises?"

"No, mother; I am sure I try to keep them; but before I think I get
angry."

"We are all weak and sinful creatures," said Mrs. Gardner; "and without
help from God we can do no good thing. Even the apostle Paul found that
when he would do good, evil was present with him: so that the best
persons require aid from above, to enable them to keep in the right
path. You must be convinced of your own weakness, Isabella, before you
will feel the need of this assistance; and I should think your failures
in your efforts to regulate your temper would be enough of it.

"This is the commencement of your new year. On this day you begin
another term of duty. Think of all your faults; think particularly of
that which now troubles you so much: then go to God, and humbly confess
to him your wickedness; seek the influence of the Holy Spirit; promise
from this day to try and govern your temper, and promise it in his
presence. Ask God to help you to keep this resolution; pray that you may
be gentle, kind, and forgiving; humble, and willing to be reproved; and
that the beginning of your new year may be the beginning of a new life
with you.

"I now leave you to think of these things, and commit you to Him who
can alone make you perfect in every good work, with the earnest prayer
that he may cleanse and purify your heart, and lead you into the path of
life."

Isabella turned to her mother, and large tears rolled down her cheeks as
she said, "Mother, I feel the truth of what you say; I feel that I have
been an ungrateful child; I have neglected my duty to you, to my father,
sister, brothers, and friends; and I now see, for the first time, how
greatly I have been offending God. From him I will first seek
forgiveness, through the atonement of Christ, and before him I will make
a solemn resolution to try, from this day, to subdue my sinful temper. I
say, I will promise to try; I dare not promise to do it: I fear I shall
fall back many times; and perhaps before this day closes I shall have
to repent of angry words and wicked feelings."

My young readers, if any of you are conscious of having the same fault
that Isabella determined to endeavor to correct, make with her now a
resolution to pray, and strive against it, and go to your heavenly
Father, and ask his assistance. Plead earnestly in the name of Christ
for the gift of the Holy Spirit.

Mrs. Gardner heard with gratitude the determination of her child, and
left her with an affectionate wish that her birth-day might pass
happily. When Isabella returned to her chamber she found upon her table
a large Bible. It was a birth-day gift from her parents, and beneath
Isabella's name were written the words which stand on the title-page of
this book,--"He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty; and he
that ruleth his spirit, than he that taketh a city." Prov. xvi, 32.

Isabella had two brothers, Edward and George: they were both younger
than herself. Mary, her only sister, was seventeen years old, and was a
lovely example of gentleness and piety. She was not so quick as
Isabella; but she had "the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit," which
is far more beautiful in the sight of God than the most brilliant
worldly accomplishments. Her faults were controlled by Christian
principle and self-denial; and an affectionate interest in the happiness
of others marked her conduct.

On the morning of Isabella's birthday, Mary was busily employed in
arranging fresh flowers in the little parlor, and in trying to make
everything look pleasant for her sister. The recollection of Isabella's
unkindness to her the day before, while it grieved her kind heart, only
made her the more anxious to add to her happiness.

This was like many other summer days. Though it opened in sunshine, it
closed in clouds. At about twelve o'clock the bright light was darkened,
and soon the heavy rain began to fall.

"How cross Isabella will be this afternoon!" said Edward to his sister
Mary. "I am sure I don't want to see her; she will be so angry because
it rains."

"That is a very unkind remark, Edward," replied Mary, "and shows a
wrong state of feeling. I have not heard Isabella speak an angry word
to-day; and instead of wishing to be out of her way, you ought to try to
do all that you can to make up to her for the disappointment she will
feel at not seeing her young friends."

"You are right, sister Mary," said Edward: "in judging Isabella I was
committing the same sin myself; and I thank you for correcting me. I
will try to make my sister happy; but I do hope that as she grows older
she will become more amiable, and do to others as she would have them do
to her."

At this moment Isabella entered the room. There was no blue sky to be
seen, nor any prospect of fair weather.

"I am sorry that your friends will not be able to come this afternoon,
Isabella," said Mary; "but we will all try to make the evening of your
birth-day pass pleasantly; and when our father comes home, I am sure he
will read to us in any book you wish."

Isabella thanked her sister, and said she thought she deserved the
disappointment.

After tea Mr. Gardner read a very interesting book to his children. They
listened with pleasure, and had a happy evening; and when they knelt in
family devotion, Isabella deeply felt her father's petition, that as his
children grew in years, they might, like their divine Master, "grow in
favor with God and man." She went to bed that night with a cheerful
heart, rejoicing that she had been able to keep her resolution for one
day. "I give God thanks," said she, "that his grace has been sufficient
for this purpose."

One afternoon Isabella asked her sister Mary to go with her to see their
cousins, who lived about half a mile from their father's house. Mary
told her that she would be glad to go with her on any other day, but
that she was engaged that afternoon, to visit her Sunday-school
children. Mary had been a Sunday-school teacher but a short time, and
she was deeply interested in the sacred work. Isabella had set her heart
upon going to see her cousins, and doubted not that Mary would have been
ready to go with her. She was disappointed; and, forgetting herself,
she told Mary that she thought she was very unkind, and that she had
better oblige her sister, than go and see children that did not care
anything about her. Isabella spoke angrily, and looked displeased. One
moment after she remembered her resolution; but she was then too proud
to confess her fault.

Mary made no reply, but soon went out upon her errand of love. The faces
of the little children brightened with pleasure as she entered their
doors. "Dear Miss Mary," said one little blue-eyed girl, "I have learned
my verse in the Bible every morning, as you said I must; and to-morrow I
shall say to you seven verses out of the second chapter of Matthew,
about the birth of Jesus Christ in Bethlehem, of Judea."

"And I," said her little sister, "have learned my hymn, about 'little
children, love each other;' and I have tried to love brother John, and
to be kind to sister Susan, as you said was right."

"Does no one but I say that you must love your brothers and sisters,
Nancy?" said Mary.

"O yes," said Nancy; "our Lord Jesus Christ says so; and he says we
cannot be his children unless we love one another. I think of that
sometimes, but sister Susan thinks of it much oftener than I do; and
when John and I get angry in our play, or speak cross to any one at
school, she will come, and say so sweetly, 'Little children, love each
other.'"

Mary told Nancy to remember her hymn at all times, and to be early at
Sunday school the next morning, to say it to her.

Mary found one of her scholars sick,--a little girl, named Sarah, who on
the Sunday before was as bright and as well as any child in school. Now
her hands were burning with fever, and her large dark eyes were dim with
disease. Once they brightened a little when Mary spoke to her of her
class, but she soon turned over her little head, and sunk into an uneasy
sleep. Her Testament was by her bedside, and her mother said that her
last effort, before she was taken ill, was to learn her Sunday lesson.
Mary watched by her all the afternoon: she lifted her aching head, and
spread under it the cool pillows: she bathed her burning temples, and
gently fanned her; and when, she gave the medicine, she silently prayed
that the means used for her recovery might be blessed. Sarah did not
speak, but when she opened her eyes she looked pleased that Mary was
beside her. She remained with the little sufferer until her brother came
for her in the evening, and promised to return the next day.

Isabella had gone to her room before Mary got home. She did not like to
meet her; for the unpleasant feelings had not left her bosom, though she
sincerely regretted her impatience. Pride now prevented her
acknowledging her fault. When alone, she took her Bible, and sat down to
read our Saviour's sermon on the mount. As the sacred precepts, one
after another, met her eye, she felt serious and humble. When she came
to the verse, "If thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there
rememberest that thy brother hath aught against thee; leave there thy
gift before the altar, and go thy way: first be reconciled to thy
brother, and then come and offer thy gift;" she felt that Jesus Christ
had spoken these words directly to her. She had often read them before,
but never until this moment had they reached her heart.

"What gift have I to lay upon God's altar?" she said to herself: "prayer
is my only offering; one that I am now about to present. Will God accept
it while I am angry with my sister? O no! I will go this moment to her,
and confess my fault, and ask her forgiveness. I will first be
reconciled, and then come and offer my gift."

She went to Mary's room, and putting her arms around her neck, she said,
"Dear sister, I cannot ask God to forgive me my trespasses this night
until I have told you how sorry I am that I treated you so unkindly this
afternoon. You are a good, affectionate sister to me, and I am very
ungrateful. Will you forgive me? I will try to check my impatient
feelings in future, and I hope to try in better strength than my own."

"I am quite ready to forgive you," said Mary, affectionately: "the
offense to me is but a trifle; it is not that I regret. It is the sin we
commit against God, when we give way to improper feelings of any kind,
we should mourn over. He has commanded us to be patient and forgiving;
and it makes me sad to think how often we grieve his Holy Spirit by
doing what we know is wrong."

"It is a source of daily sorrow to me," replied Isabella, "that I cannot
cultivate the temper of mind which is pleasing to God and man."

"I have rejoiced lately, dear Isabella, to see you bear many little
disappointments patiently; and until yesterday I have scarcely heard a
hasty word from you for some time. I hope you will persevere, and that
we shall both of us grow better as we grow older."

"Yes," said Isabella, "I have endeavored lately to subdue my evil
temper, which is the source of so much trouble to me, I had hoped that I
had in some degree succeeded, for many a time when I have felt an angry
passion rising, I have tried to lift up my heart to God, and to say,
'Lord, give me strength to resist this temptation;' but to-day I have
gone very far back, and how can I be forgiven for thus breaking the
solemn resolution I made on my birth-day?"

"Do not say so, Isabella. Humbly confess your fault before God: he will
forgive you according to his promise through Christ Jesus, and encourage
you in your renewed efforts. God seeth not as man seeth: he knows how
frail and weak we are, and he sees every penitent tear, and rejoices
over every effort we make to overcome besetting sins. Our Lord Jesus
Christ should be our example of forbearance. No angry words were ever
heard from him, and he is not willing to hear them from those who call
themselves his followers. Let us pray, my dear sister, 'that the same
mind may be in us that was also in Christ Jesus.'"

"I hear kind instructive words from you, my dear sister, and from my
parents, teachers, and other friends, and I hope they will not be lost
upon me. The Bible is much dearer to me now than it once was, and I find
there simple directions for every duty. Formerly when I read my
Saviour's words, if I applied them at all, it was to somebody else
rather than myself; but now I begin to feel that I need his blessed
counsels more than anybody."

"I am thankful, Isabella, to hear you speak so of the Bible. May it be a
lamp unto the feet and a light unto the path, of us both; then our
footsteps will not slip, and we shall be faithful children, sisters, and
friends. Jesus Christ came to this world to save us from the power as
well as the punishment of sin; and his gospel must purify our hearts,
and correct our daily faults, or it will do us no good."

Isabella listened attentively to her sister's words. She felt their
value, for she saw how faithfully Mary practiced what she taught.

"Good night, dear sister," said Isabella: "may the humbling recollection
of to-day's failure strengthen me in my efforts to keep my resolution."

As week after week passed by, Isabella Gardner met new difficulties to
oppose her resolution; but though often cast down, she gained strength
every day.

Her trials at her day-school were very great, for her school-fellows did
not know how she was endeavoring to correct her great fault; and they
would often avoid her company in their walks and amusements, knowing how
she formerly made them unhappy by her caprices. She bore all this
patiently, and would leave her companions immediately when anything was
said or done that displeased her; and by going away by herself she was
prevented from making a hasty reply, and had time to reflect and gather
strength for future trials.

It was hard for Isabella to "cease to do evil," and harder still for her
to "learn to do well;" and it would fill a much larger book than this,
were I to tell you of all the difficulties she met with in trying to
"put on the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit."

But God was near. He saw her efforts and her failures, and he saw that
his correcting hand must be stretched forth to finish the good work
which he had begun. He sent sickness upon her, and the lately blooming
Isabella was laid low upon the bed of pain. It was then she was called
upon to "let patience have its perfect work."

When Isabella heard her physician say that she would probably be ill for
a long time, she thought of her resolution, and feared that she would be
unable to keep it when there was so much pain to bear, and so much
medicine to be taken. Then the solemn thought came that death might be
very near, and that she might have but a little time left to correct her
fault; and she determined to pray for patience, and to be particularly
watchful over herself.

"I have indulged my old habit of fretfulness a good deal to-day,
mother," she said, as Mrs. Gardner sat down by her side, after making
everything ready for the night. "I fear I shall never correct it; but I
did not think of this sick bed when I made my resolution."

"Has not God promised to be 'about your bed, and about your path,' my
dear child?" said Mrs. Gardner.

"Yes, mother; and could I but remember his presence, I should not so
often grieve you by my impatience."

"You must not talk any more tonight, Isabella," said her mother
affectionately; "but try to go to sleep, and remember that God is always
near you, and that his Holy Spirit is more grieved than even your mother
by any disobedience to his commands. I love you, and forgive you. Now go
to sleep, and may you awake refreshed in body and soul."

Mary nursed her sister night and day, and never left her except when
Mrs. Gardner insisted upon her going away to rest herself. Isabella was
often impatient toward her, but Mary quietly went on treating her with
more and more tenderness. She scarcely spoke, but humbly and silently
went on doing everything a sister's love could suggest.

"I wish you would speak cross to me sometimes," said Isabella to her
one day, "and then I should not feel so sorry after I had been unkind
to you; but you are so patient and good, that it makes me quite ashamed
of my fretfulness."

"I will do anything for you but that, Isabella," said Mary; "but it is
my constant prayer that my Saviour may grant me the temper of mind that
becometh his disciple, and that I may 'sin not with my lips' against
him."

Isabella became rapidly worse, and the sorrowful countenance of her
father, and the anxious tenderness of her mother, showed how dear their
erring child was to their hearts.

Edward would come home early from school to know how his sister was, and
to see if there was anything he could do for her; and the merry voice of
little George was still, and no one heard the sound of his ball or top.

It was a house of sadness, but of composure,--a house of Christian
sorrow! Trouble had entered it; but its inmates felt that the trouble
came from a Father's hand, and that they should have no more than He who
knew them best, and loved them best, saw was for their good. They felt
their Saviour's presence, and rested upon his words, "My grace is
sufficient for thee."

But this sickness was not unto death: God raised Isabella from her bed
of pain to glorify him by the holy obedience of her life. To the eye of
man there was much yet to be done; but her heart was humbled, and her
pride subdued; and He who knew all her weakness, saw that she would
persevere, and that his chastisement had answered the purpose for which
it had been sent.

As Isabella began to recover, the confinement to her room, and her
extreme weakness, were rather more difficult to bear than her sickness.
She was, however, mild and very thoughtful, and she would sit sometimes
for an hour in the easy chair, with her face covered with her hands.

One evening she asked her mother if she had seen her show a wrong spirit
during the day.

"I have not," said Mrs. Gardner.

"I am glad of it," said Isabella: "I have been trying to be faithful to
myself, and I rejoice that one day has passed at the close of which my
mother can give me a smile of approbation. I have been looking back upon
this long sickness, and I fear I have not improved as I ought: I must
begin in earnest now, relying upon divine assistance."

It was a happy morning in Mr. Gardner's family when Isabella once more
took her usual seat at the breakfast table. She was pale and thin: the
glow of health had left her cheeks; but there was an expression there
that showed the better health of the soul. The grateful child joined the
family group at breakfast with a prayer that she might never again
disturb its harmony.

But little time had passed before her school companions found that she
was "renewed in the spirit of her mind." They found her ready to forgive
those who injured her, willing to oblige others, and to be pleased
herself. They soon began to love her much; for her bright, active mind,
made her a delightful companion; and it was not long before Isabella
Gardner was one of the most pleasing and best-esteemed girls in school.

The beautiful summer had passed, and the solemn autumn. The green fields
had given their rich crops to the farmers, making glad their hearts with
an abundance of good things. In short, winter had come, and was nearly
gone.

At the close of a cold day the family of Mr. Gardner were sitting by
their comfortable fire. "I have been thinking," said little George, as
he looked into the bright fire, "how good sister Isabella has grown
lately. She has not spoken a cross word to me since I can remember; and
cousin Emily Gray says she would rather come to see her than anybody,
now that she is so kind and obliging."

Mr. Gardner tried, by a serious look and shake of the head, to make
little George understand that he did not like his remarks; but George
did not see him, and went on to say that he should like to know how
Isabella had managed to grow so good.

"I see your kindness, dear father," said Isabella, "in wishing George to
be silent lest he should hurt my feelings; but you need not shake your
head at him, for I am quite willing that he should say what he thinks. I
have noticed how carefully you and mother have avoided speaking of my
faults; but I have known by your silent kindness that you have seen and
approved of my efforts to overcome them. I have done but little; but I
hope by perseverance to become more worthy to be your child.

"You say, George, that I have grown better, and wonder what has made me
so. I will tell you, my dear brother. My mother's counsels and prayers
first directed me to the source of all strength,--to God, and his holy
word. I had neglected her wishes, and showed disrespect to her
authority; and in sorrow, but in much love, she committed me to the care
of my heavenly Parent. She led me to Jesus, who was meek and lowly in
heart. From him I have sought dayly, hourly help, and to him let all the
praise be given, if I have succeeded at all in subduing my unruly
temper. My long sickness, last autumn, brought me to feel my great
weakness and entire dependence upon God, and gave me time for
reflection. The patient kindness of my friends humbled me also; for I
felt how little I deserved it; and I resolved anew, that if my life was
spared, I would be a better child in future. But I have much yet to do,
and the constant effort that I am obliged to make, to conquer this one
fault, is enough to keep me humble."

"I don't quite understand all that you have said, Isabella," replied
George; "but I know it is much like what father and mother have often
told me, that when I don't know exactly how to do right, I must go to
God, and he will always direct me."

"I can scarcely tell you, George, how much happier I am now than I used
to be. I wish I could tell you and every friend I have. My disrespect to
my father and mother caused me many a bitter tear, while my unkindness
to my brothers and sisters made my dayly life unhappy; and after my
angry disputes with my school-fellows, I was left in a troubled state of
mind, vexed with myself and them. Now, with all my strivings and
failures, I have much peace; and I believe every one will have it just
in proportion as he or she obeys the commandment of the Lord Jesus
Christ, 'Love one another.'"

Mr. Gardner embraced his child, and when again they knelt in evening
devotion, he prayed that love to God and man might reign in the bosom of
each of his family, that when they were called from this world of trial
and temptation, they might all meet in those blessed regions where all
is love, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Why am I so happy this morning?" said Isabella Gardner, as she arose
from her bed, just one year after the day on which this little history
of her trials commenced: "because, through the grace of God, I have, in
some degree, subdued my sinful and unruly temper."




  YOUTHFUL TEMPTATIONS.

  Many a snare and temptation, young friend,
    Will often obtrude in your way,
  And constantly every footstep attend,
    And threaten to lead you astray.

  Perhaps you'll be tempted to hazard a lie,
    Some trivial fault to conceal;
  But remember that God, the all-seeing, is nigh,
    And will one day the falsehood reveal.

  You'll be tempted to cheat your companions at play,
    For the sake of a marble or top;
  But they who once enter dishonesty's way,
    Will find it not easy to stop.

  You'll be tempted, perhaps, holy friends to despise,
    And follow the godless and vain;
  But ever remember to walk with the wise
    If heaven you seek to attain.

  Another temptation will lie in your road,--
    To think that religion is sad;
  But none are so happy as those who love God,
    And none are so dull as the bad.

  Beware, too, of slighting the day of the Lord,
    And never its duties neglect;
  But meet with his people, and rev'rence his word,
    If you would his blessing expect.

  But though such temptations your path will attend,
    The Lord will still make you his care,--
  Will be, if you seek him, your guide and your friend,
    'Mid every temptation and snare.

       *       *       *       *       *

  HEAVEN.

  Far beyond the furthest sky,
  Never seen by mortal eye,
  Heaven in dazzling beauty lies,--
  An unfading paradise.

  Evening dim, and gloomy night,
  Never veil that world of light;
  Winter never sojourns there,
  Summer reigns throughout the year.

  In one bright unclouded day
  Endless ages roll away;
  There, beneath the unsetting sun,
  Years of ceaseless pleasure run.

  There the good, in concord sweet,
  Worship at Jehovah's feet,--
  Raise the song, with joy unknown,
  Circling round his holy throne.

  Works of love, and songs of joy,
  All the happy hours employ;
  Sickness, trouble, want, and pain,
  Seek admittance there in vain.

  There shall He who, laugh'd to scorn,
  Wore the piercing crown of thorn,
  Hear his praise in sweetest chords,
  King of kings, and Lord of lords.

  O may I, when life is pass'd,
  Join that happy throng at last;
  Through the great Redeemer's blood,
  Sing with them, and dwell with God.

       *       *       *       *       *

  IMPROVEMENT.

  How many poor children I see every day
    Who have no one to guide them aright!
  No wonder in vice they should wander astray,
    And in all that is evil delight.

  But I, who have got a good Bible to read,
    And parents so anxious and kind,
  Shall prove myself vile and ungrateful indeed
    If I still am perversely inclined.

  These blessings will rise at God's terrible bar,
    If I do not grow better by them;
  And my Bible, neglected, will also be there,
    And my friends and my teachers condemn.

  Then let me attend, and make haste to improve,
    With every fresh season that's given,
  And pray to the Lord of all mercy and love
    To train me for virtue and heaven.




BOOKS PUBLISHED FOR THE SUNDAY-SCHOOL UNION OF THE METHODIST EPISCOPAL
CHURCH.

       *       *       *       *       *

NAPOLEON BONAPARTE:

SKETCHES FROM HIS HISTORY. WRITTEN FOR THE YOUNG.

No person, young or old, that takes up this book will wish to put it
down before it is finished; and no reader will fail to be profited by
its perusal. We doubt whether in the same space there can anywhere be
found a better summary of the history of that wonderful man, or a
clearer picture of the folly of his extravagant ambition, or the
cruelties it led him to perpetrate, and of the downfall in which it
terminated. False views of the character of warriors and conquerors have
ruined thousands. Need any other fact be stated to show the importance
of giving the young, especially, timely and correct views of these
characters?

If there is one class to whom more than another this book is
particularly commended, it is to that large class of boys, between the
ages of five and fifteen years, who often think, and sometimes say, "I
would like to be a soldier."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Good Resolution, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOOD RESOLUTION ***

***** This file should be named 10994.txt or 10994.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/9/9/10994/

Produced by Garrett Alley and PG Distributed Proofreaders

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


