The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Boatswain's Mate, by W.W. Jacobs

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Boatswain's Mate
       Captains All, Book 2.

Author: W.W. Jacobs

Release Date: February 20, 2004 [EBook #11182]

Language: English

Character set encoding: US-ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOATSWAIN'S MATE ***




Produced by David Widger




CAPTAINS ALL

By W.W. Jacobs



THE BOATSWAIN'S MATE

[Illustration: "The Boatswain's Mate"]

Mr. George Benn, retired boat-swain, sighed noisily, and with a
despondent gesture, turned to the door and stood with the handle in his
hand; Mrs. Waters, sitting behind the tiny bar in a tall Windsor-chair,
eyed him with some heat.

"My feelings'll never change," said the boatswain.

"Nor mine either," said the landlady, sharply.  "It's a strange thing,
Mr. Benn, but you always ask me to marry you after the third mug."

"It's only to get my courage up," pleaded the boatswain.  "Next time I'll
do it afore I 'ave a drop; that'll prove to you I'm in earnest."

He stepped outside and closed the door before the landlady could make a
selection from the many retorts that crowded to her lips.

After the cool bar, with its smell of damp saw-dust, the road seemed hot
and dusty; but the boatswain, a prey to gloom natural to a man whose hand
has been refused five times in a fortnight, walked on unheeding.  His
steps lagged, but his brain was active.

He walked for two miles deep in thought, and then coming to a shady bank
took a seat upon an inviting piece of turf and lit his pipe.  The heat
and the drowsy hum of bees made him nod; his pipe hung from the corner of
his mouth, and his eyes closed.

He opened them at the sound of approaching footsteps, and, feeling in his
pocket for matches, gazed lazily at the intruder.  He saw a tall man
carrying a small bundle over his shoulder, and in the erect carriage, the
keen eyes, and bronzed face had little difficulty in detecting the old
soldier.

The stranger stopped as he reached the seated boatswain and eyed him
pleasantly.

"Got a pipe o' baccy, mate?" he inquired.

The boatswain handed him the small metal box in which he kept that
luxury.

"Lobster, ain't you?" he said, affably.

The tall man nodded.  "Was," he replied.  "Now I'm my own commander-in-
chief."

"Padding it?" suggested the boatswain, taking the box from him and
refilling his pipe.

The other nodded, and with the air of one disposed to conversation
dropped his bundle in the ditch and took a seat beside him.  "I've got
plenty of time," he remarked.

Mr. Benn nodded, and for a while smoked on in silence.  A dim idea which
had been in his mind for some time began to clarify.  He stole a glance
at his companion--a man of about thirty-eight, clear eyes, with humorous
wrinkles at the corners, a heavy moustache, and a cheerful expression
more than tinged with recklessness.

"Ain't over and above fond o' work?" suggested the boatswain, when he had
finished his inspection.

"I love it," said the other, blowing a cloud of smoke in the air, "but we
can't have all we want in this world; it wouldn't be good for us."

The boatswain thought of Mrs. Waters, and sighed.  Then he rattled his
pocket.

"Would arf a quid be any good to you?" he inquired.

"Look here," began the soldier; "just because I asked you for a pipe o'
baccy--"

"No offence," said the other, quickly.  "I mean if you earned it?"

The soldier nodded and took his pipe from his mouth.  "Gardening and
windows?" he hazarded, with a shrug of his shoulders.

The boatswain shook his head.

"Scrubbing, p'r'aps?" said the soldier, with a sigh of resignation.
"Last house I scrubbed out I did it so thoroughly they accused me of
pouching the soap.  Hang 'em!"

"And you didn't?" queried the boatswain, eyeing him keenly.

The soldier rose and, knocking the ashes out of his pipe, gazed at him
darkly.  "I can't give it back to you," he said, slowly, "because I've
smoked some of it, and I can't pay you for it because I've only got
twopence, and that I want for myself.  So long, matey, and next time
a poor wretch asks you for a pipe, be civil."

"I never see such a man for taking offence in all my born days,"
expostulated the boat-swain.  "I 'ad my reasons for that remark, mate.
Good reasons they was."

The soldier grunted and, stooping, picked up his bundle.

"I spoke of arf a sovereign just now," continued the boatswain,
impressively, "and when I tell you that I offer it to you to do a bit o'
burgling, you'll see 'ow necessary it is for me to be certain of your
honesty."

"_Burgling?_" gasped the astonished soldier.  "_Honesty?_  'Struth; are
you drunk or am I?"

"Meaning," said the boatswain, waving the imputation away with his hand,
"for you to pretend to be a burglar."

"We're both drunk, that's what it is," said the other, resignedly.

The boatswain fidgeted.  "If you don't agree, mum's the word and no 'arm
done," he said, holding out his hand.

"Mum's the word," said the soldier, taking it.  "My name's Ned Travers,
and, barring cells for a spree now and again, there's nothing against it.
Mind that."

"Might 'appen to anybody," said Mr. Benn, soothingly.  "You fill your
pipe and don't go chucking good tobacco away agin."

Mr. Travers took the offered box and, with economy born of adversity,
stooped and filled up first with the plug he had thrown away.  Then he
resumed his seat and, leaning back luxuriously, bade the other "fire
away."

"I ain't got it all ship-shape and proper yet," said Mr. Benn, slowly,
"but it's in my mind's eye.  It's been there off and on like for some
time."

He lit his pipe again and gazed fixedly at the opposite hedge.  "Two
miles from here, where I live," he said, after several vigorous puffs,
"there's a little public-'ouse called the Beehive, kept by a lady wot
I've got my eye on."

The soldier sat up.

"She won't 'ave me," said the boatswain, with an air of mild surprise.

The soldier leaned back again.

"She's a lone widder," continued Mr. Benn, shaking his head, "and the
Beehive is in a lonely place.  It's right through the village, and the
nearest house is arf a mile off."

"Silly place for a pub," commented Mr. Travers.

"I've been telling her 'ow unsafe it is," said the boatswain.  "I've been
telling her that she wants a man to protect her, and she only laughs at
me.  She don't believe it; d'ye see?  Likewise I'm a small man--small,
but stiff.  She likes tall men."

"Most women do," said Mr. Travers, sitting upright and instinctively
twisting his moustache.  "When I was in the ranks--"

"My idea is," continued the boatswain, slightly raising his voice, "to
kill two birds with one stone--prove to her that she does want being
protected, and that I'm the man to protect her.  D'ye take my meaning,
mate?"

The soldier reached out a hand and felt the other's biceps.  "Like a lump
o' wood," he said, approvingly.

"My opinion is," said the boatswain, with a faint smirk, "that she loves
me without knowing it."

"They often do," said Mr. Travers, with a grave shake of his head.

"Consequently I don't want 'er to be disappointed," said the other.

"It does you credit," remarked Mr. Travers.

"I've got a good head," said Mr. Benn, "else I shouldn't 'ave got my
rating as boatswain as soon as I did; and I've been turning it over in my
mind, over and over agin, till my brain-pan fair aches with it.  Now, if
you do what I want you to to-night and it comes off all right, damme I'll
make it a quid."

"Go on, Vanderbilt," said Mr. Travers; "I'm listening."

The boatswain gazed at him fixedly.  "You meet me 'ere in this spot at
eleven o'clock to-night," he said, solemnly; "and I'll take you to her
'ouse and put you through a little winder I know of.  You goes upstairs
and alarms her, and she screams for help.  I'm watching the house,
faithful-like, and hear 'er scream.  I dashes in at the winder, knocks
you down, and rescues her.  D'ye see?"

"I hear," corrected Mr. Travers, coldly.

"She clings to me," continued the boat-swain, with a rapt expression of
face, "in her gratitood, and, proud of my strength and pluck, she marries
me."

"An' I get a five years' honeymoon," said the soldier.

The boatswain shook his head and patted the other's shoulder.  "In the
excitement of the moment you spring up and escape," he said, with a
kindly smile.  "I've thought it all out.  You can run much faster than I
can; any-ways, you will.  The nearest 'ouse is arf a mile off, as I said,
and her servant is staying till to-morrow at 'er mother's, ten miles
away."

Mr. Travers rose to his feet and stretched himself.  "Time I was
toddling," he said, with a yawn.  "Thanks for amusing me, mate."

"You won't do it?" said the boatswain, eyeing him with much concern.

"I'm hanged if I do," said the soldier, emphatically.  "Accidents will
happen, and then where should I be?"

"If they did," said the boatswain, "I'd own up and clear you."

"You might," said Mr. Travers, "and then again you mightn't.  So long,
mate."

"I--I'll make it two quid," said the boat-swain, trembling with
eagerness.  "I've took a fancy to you; you're just the man for the job."

The soldier, adjusting his bundle, glanced at him over his shoulder.
"Thankee," he said, with mock gratitude.

"Look 'ere," said the boatswain, springing up and catching him by the
sleeve; "I'll give it to you in writing.  Come, you ain't faint-hearted?
Why, a bluejacket 'ud do it for the fun o' the thing.  If I give it to
you in writing, and there should be an accident, it's worse for me than
it is for you, ain't it?"

Mr. Travers hesitated and, pushing his cap back, scratched his head.

"I gives you the two quid afore you go into the house," continued the
boatswain, hastily following up the impression he had made.  "I'd give
'em to you now if I'd got 'em with me.  That's my confidence in you; I
likes the look of you.  Soldier or sailor, when there is a man's work to
be done, give 'em to me afore anybody."

[Illustration: "'I gives you the two quid afore you go into the house,'
continued the boatswain."]

The soldier seated himself again and let his bundle fall to the ground.
"Go on," he said, slowly.  "Write it out fair and square and sign it, and
I'm your man."

The boatswain clapped him on the shoulder and produced a bundle of papers
from his pocket.  "There's letters there with my name and address on
'em," he said.  "It's all fair, square, and above-board.  When you've
cast your eyes over them I'll give you the writing."

Mr. Travers took them and, re-lighting his pipe, smoked in silence, with
various side glances at his companion as that enthusiast sucked his
pencil and sat twisting in the agonies of composition.  The document
finished--after several failures had been retrieved and burnt by the
careful Mr. Travers--the boat-swain heaved a sigh of relief, and handing
it over to him, leaned back with a complacent air while he read it.

"Seems all right," said the soldier, folding it up and putting it in his
waistcoat-pocket.  "I'll be here at eleven to-night."

"Eleven it is," said the boatswain, briskly, "and, between pals--here's
arf a dollar to go on with."

He patted him on the shoulder again, and with a caution to keep out of
sight as much as possible till night walked slowly home.  His step was
light, but he carried a face in which care and exultation were strangely
mingled.

By ten o'clock that night care was in the ascendant, and by eleven, when
he discerned the red glow of Mr. Travers's pipe set as a beacon against a
dark background of hedge, the boatswain was ready to curse his inventive
powers.  Mr. Travers greeted him cheerily and, honestly attributing the
fact to good food and a couple of pints of beer he had had since the
boatswain left him, said that he was ready for anything.

Mr. Benn grunted and led the way in silence.  There was no moon, but the
night was clear, and Mr. Travers, after one or two light-hearted attempts
at conversation, abandoned the effort and fell to whistling softly
instead.

Except for one lighted window the village slept in darkness, but the
boatswain, who had been walking with the stealth of a Red Indian on the
war-path, breathed more freely after they had left it behind.  A renewal
of his antics a little farther on apprised Mr. Travers that they were
approaching their destination, and a minute or two later they came to a
small inn standing just off the road.  "All shut up and Mrs. Waters abed,
bless her," whispered the boatswain, after walking care-fully round the
house.  "How do you feel?"

"I'm all right," said Mr. Travers.  "I feel as if I'd been burgling all
my life.  How do you feel?"

"Narvous," said Mr. Benn, pausing under a small window at the rear of the
house.  "This is the one."

Mr. Travers stepped back a few paces and gazed up at the house.  All was
still.  For a few moments he stood listening and then re-joined the
boatswain.

"Good-bye, mate," he said, hoisting himself on to the sill.  "Death or
victory."

The boatswain whispered and thrust a couple of sovereigns into his hand.
"Take your time; there's no hurry," he muttered.  "I want to pull myself
together.  Frighten 'er enough, but not too much.  When she screams I'll
come in."

Mr. Travers slipped inside and then thrust his head out of the window.
"Won't she think it funny you should be so handy?" he inquired.

"No; it's my faithful 'art," said the boat-swain, "keeping watch over her
every night, that's the ticket.  She won't know no better."

Mr. Travers grinned, and removing his boots passed them out to the other.
"We don't want her to hear me till I'm upstairs," he whispered.  "Put 'em
outside, handy for me to pick up."

The boatswain obeyed, and Mr. Travers--who was by no means a good hand at
darning socks--shivered as he trod lightly over a stone floor.  Then,
following the instructions of Mr. Benn, he made his way to the stairs and
mounted noiselessly.

But for a slight stumble half-way up his progress was very creditable for
an amateur.  He paused and listened and, all being silent, made his way
to the landing and stopped out-side a door.  Despite himself his heart
was beating faster than usual.

He pushed the door open slowly and started as it creaked.  Nothing
happening he pushed again, and standing just inside saw, by a small ewer
silhouetted against the casement, that he was in a bedroom.  He listened
for the sound of breathing, but in vain.

"Quiet sleeper," he reflected; "or perhaps it is an empty room.  Now, I
wonder whether--"

The sound of an opening door made him start violently, and he stood
still, scarcely breathing, with his ears on the alert.  A light shone on
the landing, and peeping round the door he saw a woman coming along the
corridor--a younger and better-looking woman than he had expected to
see.  In one hand she held aloft a candle, in the other she bore a
double-barrelled gun.  Mr. Travers withdrew into the room and, as the
light came nearer, slipped into a big cupboard by the side of the
fireplace and, standing bolt upright, waited.  The light came into the
room.

"Must have been my fancy," said a pleasant voice.

"Bless her," smiled Mr. Travers.

His trained ear recognized the sound of cocking triggers.  The next
moment a heavy body bumped against the door of the cupboard and the key
turned in the lock.

"Got you!" said the voice, triumphantly.  "Keep still; if you try and
break out I shall shoot you."

"All right," said Mr. Travers, hastily; "I won't move."

"Better not," said the voice.  "Mind, I've got a gun pointing straight at
you."

"Point it downwards, there's a good girl," said Mr. Travers, earnestly;
"and take your finger off the trigger.  If anything happened to me you'd
never forgive yourself."

"It's all right so long as you don't move," said the voice; "and I'm not
a girl," it added, sternly.

"Yes, you are," said the prisoner.  "I saw you.  I thought it was an
angel at first.  I saw your little bare feet and--"

A faint scream interrupted him.

"You'll catch cold," urged Mr. Travers.

"Don't you trouble about me," said the voice, tartly.

"I won't give any trouble," said Mr. Travers, who began to think it was
time for the boatswain to appear on the scene.  "Why don't you call for
help?  I'll go like a lamb."

"I don't want your advice," was the reply.  "I know what to do.  Now,
don't you try and break out.  I'm going to fire one barrel out of the
window, but I've got the other one for you if you move."

"My dear girl," protested the horrified Mr. Travers, "you'll alarm the
neighbourhood."

"Just what I want to do," said the voice.  "Keep still, mind."

Mr. Travers hesitated.  The game was up, and it was clear that in any
case the stratagem of the ingenious Mr. Benn would have to be disclosed.

"Stop!" he said, earnestly.  "Don't do anything rash.  I'm not a burglar;
I'm doing this for a friend of yours--Mr. Benn."

"What?" said an amazed voice.

"True as I stand here," asseverated Mr. Travers.  "Here, here's my
instructions.  I'll put 'em under the door, and if you go to the back
window you'll see him in the garden waiting."

He rustled the paper under the door, and it was at once snatched from his
fingers.  He regained an upright position and stood listening to the
startled and indignant exclamations of his gaoler as she read the
boatswain's permit:

     "_This is to give notice that I, George Benn, being of sound mind
     and body, have told Ned Travers to pretend to be a burglar at Mrs.
     Waters's.  He ain't a burglar, and I shall be outside all the time.
     It's all above-board and ship-shape.

     "(Signed) George Benn_"

"Sound mind--above-board--ship-shape," repeated a dazed voice.  "Where is
he?"

"Out at the back," replied Mr. Travers.  "If you go to the window you can
see him.  Now, do put something round your shoulders, there's a good
girl."

There was no reply, but a board creaked.  He waited for what seemed a
long time, and then the board creaked again.

"Did you see him?" he inquired.

"I did," was the sharp reply.  "You both ought to be ashamed of
yourselves.  You ought to be punished."

"There is a clothes-peg sticking into the back of my head," remarked Mr.
Travers.  "What are you going to do?"

There was no reply.

"What are you going to do?" repeated Mr. Travers, somewhat uneasily.
"You look too nice to do anything hard; leastways, so far as I can judge
through this crack."

There was a smothered exclamation, and then sounds of somebody moving
hastily about the room and the swish of clothing hastily donned.

"You ought to have done it before," commented the thoughtful Mr. Travers.
"It's enough to give you your death of cold."

"Mind your business," said the voice, sharply.  "Now, if I let you out,
will you promise to do exactly as I tell you?"

"Honour bright," said Mr. Travers, fervently.

"I'm going to give Mr. Benn a lesson he won't forget," proceeded the
other, grimly.  "I'm going to fire off this gun, and then run down and
tell him I've killed you."

"Eh?"  said the amazed Mr. Travers.  "Oh, Lord!"

"H'sh!  Stop that laughing," commanded the voice.  "He'll hear you.  Be
quiet!"

The key turned in the lock, and Mr. Travers, stepping forth, clapped his
hand over his mouth and endeavoured to obey.  Mrs. Waters, stepping back
with the gun ready, scrutinized him closely.

"Come on to the landing," said Mr. Travers, eagerly.  "We don't want
anybody else to hear.  Fire into this."

He snatched a patchwork rug from the floor and stuck it up against the
balusters.  "You stay here," said Mrs. Waters.  He nodded.

She pointed the gun at the hearth-rug, the walls shook with the
explosion, and, with a shriek that set Mr. Travers's teeth on edge, she
rushed downstairs and, drawing back the bolts of the back door, tottered
outside and into the arms of the agitated boatswain.

"Oh! oh! oh!" she cried.

"What--what's the matter?" gasped the boatswain.

The widow struggled in his arms.  "A burglar," she said, in a tense
whisper.  "But it's all right; I've killed him."

"Kill--" stuttered the other.  "Kill----_Killed him?_"

Mrs. Waters nodded and released herself, "First shot," she said, with a
satisfied air.

The boatswain wrung his hands.  "Good heavens!" he said, moving slowly
towards the door.  "Poor fellow!"

"Come back," said the widow, tugging at his coat.

"I was--was going to see--whether I could do anything for 'im," quavered
the boatswain.  "Poor fellow!"

"You stay where you are," commanded Mrs. Waters.  "I don't want any
witnesses.  I don't want this house to have a bad name.  I'm going to
keep it quiet."

"Quiet?" said the shaking boatswain.  "How?"

"First thing to do," said the widow, thoughtfully, "is to get rid of the
body.  I'll bury him in the garden, I think.  There's a very good bit of
ground behind those potatoes.  You'll find the spade in the tool-house."

The horrified Mr. Benn stood stock-still regarding her.

"While you're digging the grave," continued Mrs. 'Waters, calmly, "I'll
go in and clean up the mess."

The boatswain reeled and then fumbled with trembling fingers at his
collar.

Like a man in a dream he stood watching as she ran to the tool-house and
returned with a spade and pick; like a man in a dream he followed her on
to the garden.

"Be careful," she said, sharply; "you're treading down my potatoes."

The boatswain stopped dead and stared at her.  Apparently unconscious of
his gaze, she began to pace out the measurements and then, placing the
tools in his hands, urged him to lose no time.

"I'll bring him down when you're gone," she said, looking towards the
house.

The boatswain wiped his damp brow with the back of his hand.  "How are
you going to get it downstairs?" he breathed.

"Drag it," said Mrs. Waters, briefly.

"Suppose he isn't dead?" said the boat-swain, with a gleam of hope.

"Fiddlesticks!" said Mrs. Waters.  "Do you think I don't know?  Now,
don't waste time talking; and mind you dig it deep.  I'll put a few
cabbages on top afterwards--I've got more than I want."

She re-entered the house and ran lightly upstairs.  The candle was still
alight and the gun was leaning against the bed-post; but the visitor had
disappeared.  Conscious of an odd feeling of disappointment, she looked
round the empty room.

"Come and look at him," entreated a voice, and she turned and beheld the
amused countenance of her late prisoner at the door.

"I've been watching from the back window," he said, nodding.  "You're a
wonder; that's what you are.  Come and look at him."

Mrs. Waters followed, and leaning out of the window watched with simple
pleasure the efforts of the amateur sexton.  Mr. Benn was digging like
one possessed, only pausing at intervals to straighten his back and to
cast a fearsome glance around him.  The only thing that marred her
pleasure was the behaviour of Mr. Travers, who was struggling for a place
with all the fervour of a citizen at the Lord Mayor's show.

"Get back," she said, in a fierce whisper.  "He'll see you."

Mr. Travers with obvious reluctance obeyed, just as the victim looked up.

"Is that you, Mrs. Waters?" inquired the boatswain, fearfully.

"Yes, of course it is," snapped the widow.  "Who else should it be, do
you think?  Go on!  What are you stopping for?"

Mr. Benn's breathing as he bent to his task again was distinctly audible.
The head of Mr. Travers ranged itself once more alongside the widow's.
For a long time they watched in silence.

"Won't you come down here, Mrs. Waters?" called the boatswain, looking up
so suddenly that Mr. Travers's head bumped painfully against the side of
the window.  "It's a bit creepy, all alone."

"I'm all right," said Mrs. Waters.

"I keep fancying there's something dodging behind them currant bushes,"
pursued the unfortunate Mr. Benn, hoarsely.  "How you can stay there
alone I can't think.  I thought I saw something looking over your
shoulder just now.  Fancy if it came creeping up behind and caught hold
of you!  The widow gave a sudden faint scream.

"If you do that again" she said, turning fiercely on Mr. Travers.

"He put it into my head," said the culprit, humbly; "I should never have
thought of such a thing by myself.  I'm one of the quietest and
best-behaved----"

"Make haste, Mr. Benn," said the widow, turning to the window again;
"I've got a lot to do when you've finished."

The boatswain groaned and fell to digging again, and Mrs. Waters, after
watching a little while longer, gave Mr. Travers some pointed
instructions about the window and went down to the garden again.

"That will do, I think," she said, stepping into the hole and regarding
it critically.  "Now you'd better go straight off home, and, mind, not a
word to a soul about this."

She put her hand on his shoulder, and noticing with pleasure that he
shuddered at her touch led the way to the gate.  The boat-swain paused
for a moment, as though about to speak, and then, apparently thinking
better of it, bade her good-bye in a hoarse voice and walked feebly up
the road.  Mrs. Waters stood watching until his steps died away in the
distance, and then, returning to the garden, took up the spade and stood
regarding with some dismay the mountainous result of his industry.  Mr.
Travers, who was standing just inside the back door, joined her.

"Let me," he said, gallantly.

The day was breaking as he finished his task.  The clean, sweet air and
the exercise had given him an appetite to which the smell of cooking
bacon and hot coffee that proceeded from the house had set a sharper
edge.  He took his coat from a bush and put it on.  Mrs. Waters appeared
at the door.

"You had better come in and have some breakfast before you go," she said,
brusquely; "there's no more sleep for me now."

Mr. Travers obeyed with alacrity, and after a satisfying wash in the
scullery came into the big kitchen with his face shining and took a seat
at the table.  The cloth was neatly laid, and Mrs. Waters, fresh and
cool, with a smile upon her pleasant face, sat behind the tray.  She
looked at her guest curiously, Mr. Travers's spirits being somewhat
higher than the state of his wardrobe appeared to justify.

"Why don't you get some settled work?" she inquired, with gentle
severity, as he imparted snatches of his history between bites.

"Easier said than done," said Mr. Travers, serenely.  "But don't you run
away with the idea that I'm a beggar, because I'm not.  I pay my way,
such as it is.  And, by-the-bye, I s'pose I haven't earned that two
pounds Benn gave me?"

His face lengthened, and he felt uneasily in his pocket.

"I'll give them to him when I'm tired of the joke," said the widow,
holding out her hand and watching him closely.

Mr. Travers passed the coins over to her.  "Soft hand you've got," he
said, musingly.  "I don't wonder Benn was desperate.  I dare say I should
have done the same in his place."

Mrs. Waters bit her lip and looked out at the window; Mr. Travers resumed
his breakfast.

"There's only one job that I'm really fit for, now that I'm too old for
the Army," he said, confidentially, as, breakfast finished, he stood at
the door ready to depart.

"Playing at burglars?" hazarded Mrs. Waters.

"Landlord of a little country public-house," said Mr. Travers, simply.

Mrs. Waters fell back and regarded him with open-eyed amazement.

"Good morning," she said, as soon as she could trust her voice.

"Good-bye," said Mr. Travers, reluctantly.  "I should like to hear how
old Benn takes this joke, though."

Mrs. Waters retreated into the house and stood regarding him.  "If you're
passing this way again and like to look in--I'll tell you," she said,
after a long pause.  "Good-bye."

"I'll look in in a week's time," said Mr. Travers.

He took the proffered hand and shook it warmly.  "It would be the best
joke of all," he said, turning away.

"What would?"

The soldier confronted her again.

"For old Benn to come round here one evening and find me landlord.  Think
it over."

Mrs. Waters met his gaze soberly.  "I'll think it over when you have
gone," she said, softly.  "Now go."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Boatswain's Mate, by W.W. Jacobs

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOATSWAIN'S MATE ***

***** This file should be named 11182.txt or 11182.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/1/1/8/11182/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


