The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is Going On
In It, Vol. 1, No. 48, October 7, 1897, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Great Round World and What Is Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 48, October 7, 1897
       A Weekly Magazine for Boys and Girls

Author: Various

Editor: Julia Truitt Bishop

Release Date: June 9, 2005 [EBook #16029]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.(www.pgdp.net)







[Illustration: THE GREAT ROUND
WORLD
AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT.]

    VOL. 1   OCTOBER 7, 1897.   NO. 48

=Copyright, 1897, by THE GREAT ROUND WORLD Publishing Company.=

       *       *       *       *       *

The peace negotiations are settled; that is to say, the plans suggested
by Lord Salisbury, and agreed to by the Powers, have also been accepted
by the Sultan.

On the 18th of September, after a conference of three hours, the
ambassadors and Tewfik Pasha signed their names to the treaty. As soon
as this was done, Tewfik carried the document to the palace and obtained
the Sultan's signature also.

According to the terms of the treaty, the troops are to be withdrawn
from Thessaly within one month after it goes into effect, and the Powers
are to control the income of Greece until the war indemnity of fifteen
million dollars shall be paid.

Nothing now remains but for Greece to agree and for King George to sign
his name beside that of the Sultan.

Though every one must feel glad that peace has been made between these
two warring nations, yet the terms are so hard for Greece that if she
signs the treaty she will practically be signing away her independence
as a nation.

There is a very shameful story behind the Greco-Turkish war. In the
histories that will be written about it, it will be recorded that Greece
was sacrificed by Europe for the sake of Turkish gold.

We have told you before of the money difficulties in Turkey, and that
the Sultan has been called the "Sick Man of Europe" because of the
unfortunate condition of his affairs, which were in such a deplorable
state that it seemed as though the kingdom of Turkey must soon be
swallowed up by the more powerful nations of Europe.

The Turkish nation has been on the verge of bankruptcy for many years.
To help the struggling Government along loans of money have been made at
different times, and all that was of value in the country pledged as
security for the repayment of the loans. Bonds were issued on these
securities, but owing to the impoverished condition of the country they
were of very little value, and at one time the Turkish bonds were the
joke of the stock market. Still, the bonds existed, and their holders
hoped at some time to get their money back.

Few governments are wealthy enough to support themselves without
borrowing money. In Europe most loans are arranged by the wealthy
bankers, who demand security in return. We explained this matter to you
in speaking of the quicksilver mines and the Rothschilds, on page 1023.

Transactions of a similar character to that of the quicksilver mines
have been entered into by almost all of the European countries, and the
consequence is that there is hardly a foreign nation that is not under
obligations to its moneyed men, or financiers, as they are called.

The power of the financiers has become so great that they are now able
to dictate the policy of Europe. Behind the will of kings and emperors
is the will of these financiers. If the moneyed men refuse to lend their
gold to a country, they may prevent its going to war, the erection of
fine buildings, or the doing of many things that are necessary to keep
up its proper position as a nation.

When Greece, enraged that her Christian brothers should be under the
thraldom of the heathen Turk, went to the rescue of Crete, all the brave
men of Europe applauded the gallant little country for her pluck. But
the brave men of Europe did not represent the money of Europe. The
financiers who were at the back of the various Powers distinctly
disapproved of the war. If Greece succeeded in whipping the Turks all
the money invested in Turkey might be lost.

In was well understood that Greece could not succeed in the struggle
with Turkey unless some of the Powers came to her aid, and so the
financiers warned the statesmen that Greece must not be helped; and
because of the power of the financiers, and for the sake of the money
involved, Greece was sacrificed, and Turkey permitted to be the victor.

The whole situation was thoroughly understood by the Sultan, who laughed
in his sleeve at the dilemma the Powers were in; and knowing that he was
perfectly safe, and that they dare not declare war against him, he
delayed the peace negotiations for months, and settled his army in
Thessaly, to destroy the prosperity of the country.

The position of Greece is now something deplorable. When she has given
her consent to the terms of the treaty she will no longer be a free and
independent nation, but a slave to the countries that control her
treasury. While she still has her King seated on the throne, his power
is no longer what it was. He can carry out no great schemes for his
country's good, for he can enter into no plans, that involve the
spending of money, without the consent of the Powers that are to manage
his affairs.

The plan that the Powers should control the treasury of Greece was not
agreed upon until Germany, prompted by the financiers, insisted that
Greece must lay money by to take care of her old debts, as well as of
the new war payment.

This is the story of the Greco-Turkish war. The great Powers stood
quietly by and let Greece be sacrificed, and then insisted upon a
shameful treaty, that will bring ruin and distress to a sister country,
because the financiers were unwilling to lose money they had invested.

The Powers are, however, by no means satisfied with the result of their
fifteen weeks of deliberation and discussion. They feel that the Sultan
has got much the best of them at every point, and even though he has
agreed to do so, they are uncertain whether he intends to keep faith
with them about either Crete or Thessaly.

It is said that as soon as the first five million dollars is paid he
will invent some fresh excuse for keeping his soldiers in Thessaly a
little longer, and that he will lengthen the time little by little,
until, in the end, he will retain possession of Thessaly altogether.

He has already hinted that he does not mean to keep faith about Crete.

He told the Italian ambassador the other day that in return for the good
terms he had made with Greece he expected the Powers to be very lenient
in regard to Crete.

The ambassador, much surprised at this remark, ventured to remind the
Sultan that Home Rule for Crete had already been agreed on.

The crafty Sultan smiled and shrugged his shoulders, and intimated to
the ambassador that the settlement of affairs in Crete was not quite so
sure as he seemed to think.

The conclusion of the peace has left every one weary and annoyed. The
Powers evidently feel ashamed of the part they have taken in the affair,
and are seeking to find an excuse for their own wrongdoings by blaming
their representatives. It is therefore rumored that all the ambassadors
at Constantinople are to be changed, because the Powers feel that they
have been outwitted by the Sultan, and can no longer have any influence
with him.

It must not be supposed that the Greeks are taking the matter quietly.

A feeling of intense indignation prevails throughout Greece.
Mass-meetings have been held protesting against the treaty, bonfires
have been built at which the people have eased their feelings by burning
copies of the hated peace document. It is even thought that the Greek
Congress, the Boule, may refuse to accept the treaty as it stands.

Some of the Greeks declare that the signing of the treaty will mean that
Greece will cease to be a nation and become nothing more than a name.

Were Greece a little stronger than she is, it is certain that she would
reject the terms of peace, and continue the war with Turkey, but
unfortunately she is in such a feeble condition that it looks as if she
would have to do just as the Powers dictate.

In spite of the anger and indignation of her people, Greece has very
little choice but to accept the treaty as it stands.

       *       *       *       *       *

Some excitement was caused last week by the rumor that General Woodford
had informed the Spanish minister of foreign affairs that unless the war
with Cuba was brought to a close in October, the United States would
interfere.

As you may suppose, this report caused a good deal of surprise. If it
were true it could only mean that war was about to be declared with
Spain.

The rumor came from Paris, and there was much telegraphing back and
forth to Washington, and interviewing persons in high positions, to know
if this report was really true.

It was a relief to everybody when word came from the Duke of Tetuan that
his talk with General Woodford had been a very pleasant one, and that
nothing but kind and friendly words had passed between them.

It seems that General Woodford told the Duke that the United States
considered the present state of affairs in Cuba most pitiable, and
offered her good offices to bring the war to an end.

The Duke of Tetuan, in repeating what our minister had said to him,
stated that the whole conversation was most satisfactory, and that he
was ready to talk further on the subject with General Woodford whenever
he was prepared to do so.

He absolutely denied that there was any talk of war, and General
Woodford, on his part, declared that war would not be thought of until
every other means had been tried.

Spain's troubles are increasing daily, and it seems more than likely
that she will be willing to accept our friendly intervention, and allow
the cruel and expensive war in Cuba to cease.

The report that more troops are to be sent to the island has been
confirmed, but it is now said that only 6,000 will be sent, instead of
the 27,000 promised.

The reason for this is that Spain is having trouble in raising money.
Money she must have, as her treasury is empty, and the enormous expenses
of the war still continue.

The new government that was formed after the death of Canovas does not
seem to have the strength to deal with the situation. It is constantly
rumored that it is about to resign, and that Senor Sagasta, who has such
liberal views about Cuba, is to be called to form a new government.

While things are in this state of uncertainty and public confidence is
thus shaken, it is but natural that the financiers should be unwilling
to loan Spain more money, lest they should not get it back.

To add to the uncertainty it is rumored abroad that there is to be an
immediate attempt by the Carlists to overthrow the Government and seize
the throne of Spain.

The poor Queen Regent is much worried with all this trouble. The loss of
Canovas at the most critical moment of the Cuban war seems to have taken
away all her courage, and it is said that she is very unhappy, and is
constantly weeping over her boy, the young King Alphonso, for the poor
mother fears she may not be strong enough to hold the crown of Spain for
him.

There is a story that in her distress the Queen Regent has sent a
personal message to Don Carlos, begging him not to begin a civil war at
a moment when Spain has so many other enemies to fight.

A civil war is a war carried on between citizens of the same country.

It is said that Don Carlos sent a very unkind reply to the Queen, and
said that he should come forward just as soon as he felt that the
country needed him.

It is stated that he believes that war with the United States cannot be
avoided, and that he intends to wait till war is declared, and then
offer to save Spain if he is made king.

His friends are all gathering at Lucerne to hold the council of which we
spoke last week. The unhappy Queen Christine is waiting with much
anxiety to learn what they decide to do.

       *       *       *       *       *

In Cuba, the insurgents continue to be victorious. The Spaniards are
being driven out of the inland towns, and their real strength is now
only on the seaboard.

Several unsuccessful attempts have been made by the Spaniards to
recapture Victoria de las Tunas, and to break the power of the
insurgents in Santiago de Cuba. The Cubans have, however, gained victory
after victory, and have at last driven the Spaniards over the trocha,
and utterly destroyed the town of Las Tunas. They were not strong enough
to fortify and hold it, so they decided to burn it to the ground.

In one of the engagements to recapture the town, General Luque, the
Spanish commander, again exchanged prisoners with the Cubans, and in a
letter to General Garcia, in reference to the matter, addressed him as
the _Commander-in-Chief of the Cuban forces in the East_. The Cubans
have sent this letter on to their representatives in Washington with
instructions to bring it to the notice of our Government, to convince
them that the Spaniards have really acknowledged the belligerent rights
of the Cubans.

The indignation in Spain over the loss of Las Tunas gave rise to such
very severe comment on Weyler's bad generalship that he made up his mind
to offer his resignation to his Government.

The Prime Minister, General Azcarraga, however, replied to Weyler's
message that he had perfect confidence in him and in his ability to
bring the war to a speedy close, and would not permit him to resign.

Weyler, gratified at this, at once sent one of his boastful and
untruthful replies.

He said that the war was all but over. He had still a little work to do
before he could consider the West of the island entirely pacified, but
that so soon as this was accomplished he would set out for Eastern Cuba
and subdue that.

The Government appeared to be perfectly satisfied with this statement,
but it is strange that this should be the case.

Months ago General Weyler said that Eastern Cuba was all but pacified,
and that he was just about to finish his work there, and proceed to
subdue Western Cuba. After a little while he declared Eastern Cuba
pacified, and started off for his work in the West.

Now he tells the same story about the West, and seems to forget that
according to his own statement Eastern Cuba is subdued.

If the great Spanish general keeps on at his present rate of progress,
it will be a long time before he gets both ends of Cuba pacified at the
same time.

Weyler complains bitterly about the filibustering expeditions. He
declares that the war could have been long since terminated if the
United States had not given so much aid to the insurgents by allowing
these expeditions to be fitted out in her ports.

The _Dauntless_ has been successful in carrying three expeditions to
Cuba lately.

One of them was landed only a few miles from Havana, and passed within
gunshot of the great fortress Morro Castle without being seen by any of
the gunboats which are supposed to guard the shores.

Weyler was furious that such a daring act should have been safely
accomplished, and has written a severe letter to the Admiral in charge
of the fleet, upbraiding him for his carelessness.

In the last of her three expeditious the saucy little _Dauntless_ ran
short of coal and water, and to the annoyance of the Spaniards the
keeper of a lighthouse situated on one of the West Indian keys that
belong to England gave the men the supplies they needed, and enabled
them to make their third trip in safety.

General Weyler has ordered an investigation of the matter, and intends
to make a formal complaint to England about the action of the lighthouse
keeper.

The way the _Dauntless_ managed her three expeditions without being
caught was very clever. All the stores, ammunition, arms, and men that
were to be conveyed to Cuba were gradually gathered on one of the
Florida keys. There are a great number of these little banks and islands
stretching along the coast of Florida, and some of them are so difficult
to reach, for any steamer that draws much water, that they make good
hiding-places.

When everything was in readiness the _Dauntless_ went down to the key,
and one after the other took off her three loads. The hiding-place was
so well chosen that no one knows exactly where it is, and if the Cubans
keep their secret they will be able to send other expeditions in the
same way.

General Weyler has other anxieties on his mind just now. He is expecting
the arrival of a new floating dock which has been built for him in
England, at a cost of $900,000.

This great dock is intended to be used as a dry-dock; that is to say, it
is so made that ships can be lifted clear out of the water by it, so
that they can be repaired, cleaned, or painted.

There is no dry-dock in Cuban harbors, and it is very necessary to have
one. Ships that cruise long in tropical waters are very apt to get their
hulls covered with barnacles and sea-weed. These growths after a while
prevent the ship from cutting easily through the water, and decrease her
speed. All ships that are long in these southern seas have to have their
hulls scraped every now and then. Many of the war-vessels that are now
in Cuban waters have been a year without this necessary cleaning, and to
make it possible to do the work in Cuba, without the loss of time
necessary to go back to the Spanish navy yards, the Government has gone
to the expense of building the floating dock.

There have been no end of difficulties about the dock. When it was
finished it was so big and heavy that it was very doubtful if any ship
could safely tow it across the Atlantic. The shipbuilders added a false
bow and stem to the dock, to make it cut its way through the water a
little, and in this fashion it is now being brought to Cuba; but the
gravest doubts are entertained as to the possibility of its ever
reaching its destination. It is feared that in case of a severe storm
the hawser, or strong rope by which it is towed, will part, and the
costly floating dock be left drifting about the ocean, a danger to
mariners.

But this is not the half of the trouble over the dock.

The greatest annoyance in regard to it is that it was built without
properly considering the amount of water it would draw; that is to say,
the depth of water necessary to float it.

Now that the dock is on its way to Cuba, it is found that it draws too
much water for the bay of Havana, and cannot be brought in and used
there.

When this unpleasant news was communicated to General Weyler, he cabled
to his agent in New York, asking him to send a dredging-machine over to
Havana immediately. To the General's mind the whole affair was simple
enough: he would get a dredging-machine, scoop out a channel, and have
the dock in place in no time.

He was therefore much angered to receive a reply that there were several
kinds of dredging-machines, and that to send him a machine that would do
the work properly it would be necessary to know the nature of the soil
of the bottom of the bay.

Now no one has ever dredged Havana Bay since the city was first founded
in the sixteenth century, and there are no means at hand of obtaining
the desired information. There will therefore be some delay before the
required investigation can be made.

Added to this, the New York firm sent him word that a special machine
will have to be constructed to dredge to the depth required by the
floating-dock, that it will take six months to build such a machine, and
another six months to dredge the bay. This makes one year before the
$900,000 floating dock now on its way to Cuba can be of any use to
Spain.

It seems a cruel waste of money at an hour when Spain is so poor.

       *       *       *       *       *

The election of Senor Domingo Mendez Capote as President of the Republic
of Cuba has been confirmed. Bartolome Maso was made Vice-President, and
Cisneros, the ex-president, was made leader of the Congress.

General Gomez was appointed Minister of War, and General Garcia
Commander-in-Chief of the army.

The report says that at the commencement of the election it seemed as if
there would be some trouble between the various candidates for office.
Realizing that it would be fatal to the cause to have any bad feeling
among the leaders, General Gomez proposed Senor Capote as a man who
would be acceptable to all parties. Every one saw the wisdom of Gomez's
suggestion, and Capote was elected.

It is said that the new President has done a great deal to get the laws
of Cuba in proper shape.

All the Cubans seem to be satisfied with the result of the election.

       *       *       *       *       *

The British have met with serious reverses in their frontier war.

They were successful in relieving the forts in the Samana Hills that
were attacked by the tribesmen, but two days after this work had been
done they were forced to retreat.

They were attacked by a large body of natives, who surrounded them, and
but for a timely charge of cavalry would have routed them. As it was,
the British retreat was orderly, and they lost none of their guns or
baggage.

The natives are delighted at their success, and especially because the
troops they attacked were a portion of the force sent out to punish them
for their rebellion.

The Government in England is much distressed that the check should have
occurred. For the sake of England's position in India it is necessary
that the British should sweep all before them, and show the tribes that
they are not to be trifled with. That the punishing expedition should
have been beaten and forced to retreat will make the work England has to
do in India still harder for her.

The tribesmen are alive to the value of their victory, and have
continued to attack the troops with the utmost persistence.

The Haddah Mullah, the priest who has been so active in raising the
rebellion, is again leading the tribes, and has roused his followers to
such a pitch of enthusiasm that they do not show the slightest fear, and
perform the most daring feats.

On one occasion the British were drawn up in battle array, and had
formed into the square, which is considered an invincible method of
receiving an enemy. The Haddah Mullah and his followers attacked three
sides of the square at the same time. The rebels were repulsed, but
their wonderful courage was commented on by the British, who, after the
engagement was over, found their bodies within a few yards of the
muzzles of the guns. Such people are hard to defeat.

It may interest you to know something about the square.

This formation of troops is considered the strongest. It is used
principally to repel cavalry or to resist a larger force. It has been in
use since the sixteenth century.

To form a square the troops are drawn up into a quadrangle, or square,
the soldiers all standing so that they face outward. By this means each
side of the square presents a solid front to the enemy, and it is
wellnigh impossible for an attacking force to break through.

In the sixteenth century the square was composed of a solid body of men;
at the present time it is a hollow formation. The soldiers stand in
ranks four or five deep, the officers, colors, and baggage being in the
centre.

The English are particularly partial to this formation, and it has long
been the boast of the commanders that a British square has never been
broken.

The force of insurgents led by the Haddah Mullah attacked the English
camp soon after nightfall. The soldiers were at once formed into a
square around their baggage, and though, as we have said, the attack was
fiercely made on three sides at once, the famous square stood firm, and
the tribesmen were forced to retire.

Ten batteries of artillery and eight regiments of cavalry have been
ordered out from England to help suppress the insurrection in India.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is reported from the Soudan that a treaty of peace is about to be
made between the Mahdi and Great Britain.

The terms of the treaty are said to be that the Mahdi will not oppose
the British forces advancing as far as Khartoum, and that they may
station troops to keep possession of the land they have gained, but that
they must not attempt to go a step farther. The Mahdi is to remain King
of Khartoum.

It is not yet known whether the terms of peace will be accepted by
England.

An interesting find was made at Berber. When the British troops entered
the town they found on one of the boats in the river a uniform-case
marked Gordon Pasha.

The English officers to whom it was brought were much moved at the sight
of an article that had once been the property of the unfortunate General
Gordon, who was killed by the Mahdists at Khartoum on January 26, 1885.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is news of Professor Andree.

You remember that he started from Spitzbergen in a balloon, hoping to
sail across the North Pole.

A report from Arctic Russia says that on the night of September 14th the
inhabitants of a little village saw a balloon which was believed to be
that of Andree's.

A day or two after this a carrier-pigeon brought a despatch from the
traveller.

The tidings brought by this bird were that Andree was making a good
voyage to the eastward, and that all was going well.

There is no doubt that this message is a genuine one from the explorer.
The pigeon bore on its wings the same markings as on those which the
adventurer carried with him. Scientists have, however, expressed their
opinion that Andree has failed to reach the Pole. The message of the
bird and the direction in which the balloon was seen to be going have
convinced them that Andree has been carried eastward, and not across the
Pole, as he had hoped.

It is thought that by this time the gas in the balloon must have become
exhausted, and that Andree and his companions have had to cut loose from
it, and are on the ice somewhere near Spitzbergen, and that they may
perhaps be so fortunate as to drift near enough to civilization to be
picked up and rescued.

       *       *       *       *       *

Interesting news has reached us about Lieutenant Peary.

He left Boston in July to see if he could not establish a settlement far
to the north in Greenland, which should serve him as a base of supplies,
or a place where he could leave the main part of his baggage, and to
which he could send or return at will.

Lieutenant Peary's plan for reaching the North Pole, when he sets out in
1898, is to establish a number of Esquimau colonies at certain distances
apart, and leave supplies with each colony on which he can fall back in
case of need.

He reports that he will have no difficulty in carrying out his plan. He
met a number of old friends among the Esquimaux, all of whom were eager
to help him in his work of exploring the north of Greenland and
searching for the North Pole. He has every hope that the new trip which
he is about to undertake will be a successful one.

Lieutenant Peary reports that he is bringing with him the great Cape
York meteorite, which he intends to place in the American Museum of
Natural History in New York.

A meteorite is a fallen meteor or star, a mass of metal that has fallen
upon the earth from space. It is often called a fallen star.

From the earliest times to the present there is a record of 520
meteorites having fallen upon the earth; 142 of this number fell in the
United States; 13 were seen to fall.

Forty-five years ago a traveller visiting Greenland noticed that the
natives used some kind of metal with which they put tips and edges on
their weapons. On inquiry they told him that they obtained it from some
large stones, but they could not or would not show him where the stones
were to be found.

Lieutenant Peary determined to find them, as he suspected that they were
meteorites, and after a long and careful search he found them on
Melville Bay, a little east of Cape York.

There were three rocks, all of uncommonly large size, and on examination
they proved to be meteorites, one of them being the largest ever found.

In 1895 the two smaller ones were brought back by Lieutenant Peary; but
before he was able to move the larger one, the ice began to form in the
bay, and not wishing to be blocked in for the winter, he had to leave
the prize where it was.

Last year he made another effort to secure the big stone, but the
machinery he was using to raise it got out of order, and he again had to
abandon the attempt.

Now a message comes from Sydney, a port on Cape Breton, Nova Scotia,
which says that he has arrived safely, bringing with him the famous
meteorite.

When his vessel, the _Hope_, steamed into port she was in a very
battered condition. She had encountered so many storms and such furious
seas that her bulwarks had been washed away.

In addition to this she was burning her last ton of coal as she steamed
into port, and so her crew must have been very glad when they sighted
land.

We have not yet heard how the big meteorite was wrenched from its icy
bed, and it is probable that when the _Hope_ reaches New York we shall
have an interesting story to tell you about it.

       *       *       *       *       *

The news from the Sandwich Islands is of a very pleasant character.

The Hawaiian Senate met in extra session, and agreed to the annexation
of the islands to the United States. There was not one vote against it,
and so the treaty was ratified by a "unanimous vote" of the Senate.

Every Senator was in his seat as the roll was called, and nearly every
one had a good word to say for annexation.

A protest against the treaty was handed to the President, and considered
by the Senate before the treaty was ratified.

The Senators did not regard the protest as worthy of much consideration,
as it was signed by but fifteen persons, all of whom were friends of the
ex-queen. They therefore regarded it as a political scheme arranged by
those royalists who still have hopes of restoring the monarchy.

It is said that Liliuokalani has a new plan for the throne of Hawaii.
She has come to the conclusion that the people of the Sandwich Islands
want neither her nor her rule any longer. She did so many bad things
while she was queen that the people who would like to see the monarchy
restored would not be willing that she should be queen again.

Liliuokalani has therefore decided to resign the throne in favor of her
niece, the Princess Kaiulani.

This young lady is a charming and well-educated person, and the old
Queen is wise enough to know that none of the objections which people
have to her could apply to Kaiulani.

If the plan is successful, the young Queen is to make ample provision
for Liliuokalani.

Meanwhile Japan has agreed to arbitrate the immigration question, but
refuses to consider the matter from the Hawaiian point of view.

The complaint which was made against Japan in the first instance was
that she evaded the law which provided that every immigrant must have a
contract for labor and fifty dollars in cash in his pocket, by giving
false contracts and lending the required fifty dollars, which immigrants
gave back as soon as they were safely landed.

The Japanese refuse to enter into the question whether this fifty
dollars was fraudulently supplied. They say that so long as each man
had fifty dollars in his possession, it was nobody's business where or
how he got it. They persistently refuse to arbitrate this point, which
seems to be the most important of all the questions involved.

The Japanese are continuing to send large numbers of emigrants to
Honolulu, and the Hawaiians have become very much alarmed about it.

They insist that the new colonists are Japanese soldiers disguised as
laborers, and that the Mikado is sending them over to be in readiness to
fight for the possession of the country in case the United States
decides to annex it.

       *       *       *       *       *

The strike in Hazleton is now over, but the settlement has not been made
without a good deal of trouble and anxiety.

When the state troops ordered out by the Governor arrived in the town,
some of the men decided to go to work under the protection of the
troops. The spirit of the strikers had been broken by the firing of the
Sheriff and his posse, and many of the men who were peaceably inclined
thought the best thing to do was to go back to work.

The women did not agree with them. The wives and mothers of the
unfortunate men who had been killed declared that their dear ones should
not have been sacrificed for nothing; and as the men refused to continue
the strike, the women decided to go on with it for them.

A strike is of no use unless all the men stand together and hold out for
their point. The women understood this perfectly, and they determined
that the men should stand together.

Arming themselves with sticks, they set out in a body for the mines that
were being worked, and under the very noses of the soldiers raided the
works and drove the men out.

The next morning the men, still determined to go to work, started out in
a body for the mines. On their way they were met by a body of women, who
drove them back with threats and scoldings to their homes again.

The general in command of the state troops then decided that it was time
for him to interfere, and on the third day, when the women attempted to
stop the men, the troops were ordered to disperse them.

To frighten the women the officers ordered their men to fix their
bayonets and advance on the women as if they meant to charge them.

The two bodies met--the women brandishing their sticks, and the men with
their glittering bayonets pointed at this unusual foe.

The women were, however, not deceived. They refused to believe that the
soldiers would charge them, and when they saw the men advancing they
began to laugh. This laugh was rapidly taken up by the soldiers; and the
two parties facing each other, brandishing their weapons and laughing,
must have been a curious sight.

For some time the women stood their ground, but finally became convinced
that, though the soldiers were not going to do them any harm, they did
not mean to allow them to pass or to do any mischief of their own. They
then fell back, and returned to their homes; and the women being
disposed of, the miners went peaceably to their work.

       *       *       *       *       *

The sheriff and the deputies who did the shooting in Hazleton have been
arrested.

At the first hearing the judge decided that there was a grave cause of
complaint against the men, and so he ordered that they should be tried
before a jury to find whether they were guilty of murdering the rioters.

As they were all respectable men, who were not likely to run away, the
judge allowed them to furnish bail. That is to say, he said that if they
could each find a friend who would give the court $6,000 as a surety
that they would come up for trial when their case was called, they might
go free in the mean time.

Each of the accused men was able to furnish the required bail, and so
they are all at liberty for the present.

        *       *       *       *       *

Queen Christina of Spain is not the only queen regent in Europe. The
Government of Holland is also in the hands of a queen mother, who is
guiding the affairs of state for her young daughter, Queen Wilhelmina.

The fact has been brought to our notice by the announcement of Queen
Emma that her daughter will be eighteen years old next August, and will
then assume the cares of government.

Queen Emma has been Regent of the Netherlands since 1890, when her
husband King William III. became insane, and was declared to be
incapable of governing.

The little Wilhelmina was then ten years old. She is now a grown-up
young lady, and there is quite a stir among the royal families of Europe
to find a suitable husband for her.

A marriage has been proposed for her with Prince Alexander of Teck,
whose sister is the wife of the Duke of York, and will probably one day
be Queen of England. The Duke of York is the son of the Prince of Wales.

The young Prince of Teck has been sent to Holland to visit the young
Queen at her castle of Loo, but as yet the Queen has neither refused nor
accepted him.

It is rumored that Prince Alexander of Teck hopes that Wilhelmina will
refuse him, as he is very anxious to marry a young American of great
wealth.

This is a very romantic story, and very pleasing to our national vanity
to think that one of the daughters of America may some day be closely
related to the Queen of England, but it is a very remote contingency,
and not very likely to occur.

                                                      G.H. ROSENFELD.




INVENTION AND DISCOVERY.


Tennessee has the latest thing in bicycles.

It seems that the wheel craze is just as rampant there as it is in our
own fair city of New York, but that the facilities for owning machines
are not as great there as here.

To overcome this, a bright-minded individual has invented a new device,
which is certainly the most ingenious we have yet heard of.

It is a "nickel-in-the-slot" bicycle, and probably works somewhat on the
principle of the "quarter-in-the-slot" gas-meter, which for every
twenty-five cents put in, releases just that coin's worth of gas to
illuminate your house.

The bicycle, however, is arranged in such a manner that for every
five-cent piece dropped in the slot it will run exactly five miles.

There is not the slightest fear of the rider forgetting to renew the
nickel when he has ridden his five cents' worth; nor is there any chance
of his cheating the wheel out of an extra mile--or half inch, for the
matter of that.

When the end of the five miles is reached the honest wheel stops dead.
Whether it throws its rider over its head or not is a matter of no
moment to it. It stops then and there, and refuses to move another foot
until it is re-fed with a fresh nickel. Then it will bound along again
as peacefully as before.

The story does not say whether a device in the form of a small red flag
shoots out from any portion of the wheel to give a warning when the next
"lap's" rent is due. But without some such plan we should doubt whether
this kind of wheel would ever become very popular; for while four miles
and three quarters might be ridden with much peaceful enjoyment, the
last quarter of a mile would be filled with terrors that would spoil the
pleasure of the nicest ride ever attempted.

                                                       G.H.R.




LETTERS FROM OUR YOUNG FRIENDS.


     DEAR EDITOR:

     Where can the "pocket protector" and scissors-sharpening
     machine, mentioned in THE GREAT ROUND WORLD, be obtained.
                                                 MRS. M.F.

     NORTHFIELD, MINN., Aug. 4th, 1897.


DEAR MADAM:

We are not able to tell you where the above articles are manufactured,
but you could obtain them through the agency of any reliable,
first-class hardware store. In all such stores they have illustrated
catalogues of the various articles manufactured in their line of goods,
and you should have no difficulty in finding both the pocket protector
and the scissors sharpener.

                                                 EDITOR.


     DEAR EDITOR:

     I have never written to you before, so you don't know my
     name. Papa is on the school committee, so you sent him a
     sample copy. I saw it, and was very much interested in it. I
     am extremely fond of reading and have read at least ten
     different histories. And with one exception I like your
     little book best of all. You can imagine how well I like to
     read when I tell you I am eleven years old, and have read
     over seven hundred prose books, and the books of ten
     different poets. I could read primary lessons when I was
     three years old.

                                            Yours truly,
                                                 ELEANOR J.L.

     P.S.--I am going to earn money so I can subscribe.
     NEWBURYPORT, MASS., Sept. 7th, 1897.


DEAR ELEANOR:

We are delighted to hear from you, and to have the indorsement of such a
bright little critic as you must be after all that you have read.

Would you not like to have our premium list and learn the easiest way
for you to become a subscriber?

                                                 EDITOR.


     DEAR EDITOR:

     Your little magazine is of great interest to me, as I am
     sure it is to many others. I am especially interested in the
     accounts you give of the search for the North Pole. I do
     hope that soon _somebody_ will succeed in reaching it, so as
     to tell us just what kind of a region it is.

     I hope that the Cubans will soon gain their liberty for I
     think they surely deserve it.

     Wishing THE GREAT ROUND WORLD great success, and a long
     life, I remain,

                                 Your most devoted reader,
                                                 ALISON H.

     BREWSTER, CAPE COD, MASS., Sept. 7th, 1897.


DEAR ALISON:

Many thanks for your nice kind letter, and for the good wishes contained
in it.                 EDITOR.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is
Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 48, October 7, 1897, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD ***

***** This file should be named 16029.txt or 16029.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/6/0/2/16029/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.(www.pgdp.net)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
