The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Dore Gallery of Bible Illustrations,
Volume 3, by Anonymous, Illustrated by Gustave Dore

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Dore Gallery of Bible Illustrations, Volume 3
       Illustrated by Gustave Dore

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: July 28, 2004 [EBook #8703]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DORE BIBLE GALLERY, VOL. 3 ***




Produced by David Widger





              THE DORE GALLERY OF BIBLE ILLUSTRATIONS

                  Illustrated by Gustave Dore

                          Volume 3.



DEBORAH'S SONG OF TRIUMPH.


Then sang Deborah and Barak, the son of Abinoam on that day, saying:--

Praise ye the Lord for the avenging of Israel, When the people willingly
offered themselves. Hear, O ye kings; give ear, O ye princes; I, even I,
will sing unto the Lord; I will sing praise to the Lord God of Israel.
Lord, when thou wentest out of Seir, When thou marchedst out of the field
of Edom, The earth trembled, and the heavens dropped, the clouds also
dropped water. The mountains melted from before the Lord, Even that Sinai
from before the Lord God of Israel.

              . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Blessed above women shall Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite be; Blessed
shall she be above women in the tent. He asked water, and she gave him
milk; She brought forth butter in a lordly dish. She put her hand to the
nail, and her right hand to the workmen's hammer; And with the hammer she
smote Sisera, She smote off his head, when she had pierced and stricken
through his temples. At her feet he bowed, he fell, he lay down: At her
feet he bowed, he fell: Where he bowed, there he fell down dead. The
mother of Sisera looked out at a window, and cried through the lattice,
Why is his chariot so long in coming? Why tarry the wheels of his
chariots? Her wise ladies answered her, yea, she returned answer to
herself, Have they not sped? Have they not divided the prey; To every man
a damsel or two; To Sisera a prey of divers colours, a prey of divers
colours of needlework, Of divers colours of needlework on both sides,
meet for the necks of them that take the spoil? So let all thine enemies
perish, O Lord: But let them that love him be as the sun when he goeth
forth in his might. Judges v, 2-5, 24-31




JEPHTHAH MET BY HIS DAUGHTER.


Then the Spirit of the Lord came upon Jephthah, and he passed over
Gilead, and Manasseh, and passed over Mizpeh of Gilead, and from Mizpeh
of Gilead he passed over unto the children of Ammon.

And Jephthah vowed a vow unto the Lord, and said, If thou shalt without
fail deliver the children of Ammon into mine hands, then it shall be,
that whatsoever cometh forth of the doors of my house to meet me, when I
return in peace from the children of Ammon, shall surely be the Lord's,
and I will offer it up for a burnt offering.

So Jephthah passed over unto the children of Ammon to fight against them;
and the Lord delivered them into his hands. And he smote them from Aroer,
even till thou come to Minnith, even twenty cities, and unto the plain of
the vineyards, with a very great slaughter. Thus the children of Ammon
were subdued before the children of Israel.

And Jephthah came to Mizpeh unto his house, and, behold, his daughter
came out to meet him with timbrels and with dances: and she was his only
child; beside her he had neither son nor daughter. Judges xi, 29-34.




JEPHTHAH'S DAUGHTER AND HER COMPANIONS


And it came to pass, when he saw her, that he rent his clothes, and said,
Alas, my daughter! thou hast brought me very low, and thou art one of
them that trouble me: for I have opened my mouth unto the Lord, and I
cannot go back.

And she said unto him, My father, if thou hast opened thy mouth unto the
Lord, do to me according to that which hath proceeded out of thy mouth;
forasmuch as the Lord hath taken vengeance for thee of thine enemies,
even of the children of Ammon. And she said unto her father, Let this
thing be done for me: let me alone two months, that I may go up and down
upon the mountains, and bewail my virginity, I and my fellows.

And he said, Go. And he sent her away for two months: and she went with
her companions, and bewailed her virginity upon the mountains.

And it came to pass at the end of two months, that she returned unto her
father, who did with her according to his vow which he had vowed: and she
knew no man.

And it was a custom in Israel, that the daughters of Israel went yearly
to lament the daughter of Jephthah the Gileadite four days in a year.
Judges xi, 35-40.




SAMSON SLAYING THE LION.


Then went Samson down, and his father and his mother, to Timnath, and
came to the vineyards of Timnath; and, behold, a young lion roared
against him. And the Spirit of the Lord came mightily upon him, and he
rent him as he would have rent a kid, and he had nothing in his hand; but
he told not his father or his mother what he had done. Judges xiv, 5-6.




SAMSON AND DELILAH.


And it came to pass afterward, that he loved a woman in the valley of
Sorek, whose name was Delilah.

And the lords of the Philistines came up unto her, and said unto her,
Entice him, and see wherein his great strength lieth, and by what means
we may prevail against him, that we may bind him to afflict him; and we
will give thee every one of us eleven hundred pieces of silver.

And Delilah said to Samson, Tell me, I pray thee, wherein thy great
strength lieth, and wherewith thou mightest be bound to afflict thee. And
Samson said unto her, If they bind me with seven green withs that were
never dried, then shall I be weak, and be as another man. Then the lords
of the Philistines brought up to her seven green withs which had not been
dried, and she bound him with them. Now there were men lying in wait,
abiding with her in the chamber. And she said unto him, The Philistines
be upon thee, Samson. And he brake the withs, as a thread of tow is
broken when it toucheth the fire. So his strength was not known.

And Delilah said unto Samson, Behold, thou hast mocked me, and told me
lies: now tell me, I pray thee, wherewith thou mightest be bound. And he
said unto her, If they bind me fast with clew ropes that never were
occupied, then shall I be weak, and be as another man. Delilah therefore
took new ropes, and bound him therewith, and said unto him, The
Philistines be upon thee, Samson. And there were liers in wait abiding in
the chamber. And he brake them from off his arms like a thread.

And Delilah said unto Samson, Hitherto thou hast mocked me, and told me
lies: tell me wherewith thou mightest be bound. And he said unto her, If
thou weavest the seven locks of my head with the web. And she fastened it
with the pin, and said unto him, The Philistines be upon thee, Samson.
And he awaked out of his sleep, and went away with the pin of the beam
and with the web.

And she said unto him, How canst thou say, I love thee, when thine heart
is not with me? thou hast mocked me these three times, and hast not told
me wherein thy great strength lieth. And it came to pass, when she
pressed him daily with her words, and urged him, so that his soul was
vexed unto death; that he told her all his heart, and said unto her,
There hath not come a razor upon mine head; for I have been a Nazarite
unto God from my mother's womb if I be shaven, then my strength will go
from me, and I shall become weak, and be like any other man.

And when Delilah saw that he had told her all his heart, she sent and
called for the lords of the Philistines, saying, Come up this once, for
he hath showed me all his heart. Then the lords of the Philistines came
up unto her, and brought money in their hand. And she made him sleep upon
her knees; and she called for a man, and she caused him to shave off the
seven locks of his head; and she began to afflict him, and his strength
went from him. And she said, The Philistines be upon thee, Samson. And he
awoke out of his sleep, and said, I will go out as at other times before,
and shake myself. And he wist not that the Lord was departed from him.
Judges xvi, 4-20.




THE DEATH OF SAMSON.


But the Philistines took him, and put out his eyes, and brought him down
to Gaza, and bound him with fetters of brass; and he did grind in the
prison house.

Howbeit the hair of his head began to grow again after he was shaven.

Then the lords of the Philistines gathered them together for to offer a
great sacrifice unto Dagon their god, and to rejoice: for they said, Our
God hath delivered Samson our enemy into our hand. And when the people
saw him, they praised their god: for they said, Our god hath delivered
into our hands our enemy, and the destroyer of our country, which slew
many of us. And it came to pass, when their hearts were merry, that they
said, Call for Samson, that he may make us sport. And they called for
Samson out of the prison house; and he made them sport: and they set him
between the pillars. And Samson said unto the lad that held him by the
hand, Suffer me that I may feel the pillars whereupon the house standeth,
that I may lean upon them. Now the house was full of men and women; and
all the lords of the Philistines were there; and there were upon the roof
about three thousand men and women, that beheld while Samson made sport.

And Samson called unto the Lord, and said, O Lord God, remember me, I
pray thee, and strengthen me, I pray thee, only this once, O God, that I
may be at once avenged of the Philistines for my two eyes. And Samson
took hold of the two middle pillars upon which the house stood, and on
which it was borne up, of the one with his right hand, and of the other
with his left. And Samson said, Let me die with the Philistines. And he
bowed himself with all his might; and the house fell upon the lords, and
upon all the people that were therein. So the dead which he slew at his
death were more than they which he slew in his life.

Then his brethren and all the house of his father came down, and took
him, and brought him up, and buried him between Zorah and Eshtaol in the
burying-place of Manoah his father. And he judged Israel twenty
years.--Judges xvi; 21-31




NAOMI AND HER DAUGHTERS IN LAW.


Now it came to pass in the days when the judges ruled, that there was a
famine in the land. And a certain man of Beth-lehem-judah went to sojourn
in the country of Moab, he, and his wife, and his two sons. And the name
of the man was Elimelech, and the name of his wife Naomi, and the name of
his two sons Mahlon and Chilion, Ephrathites of Beth-lehem-judah. And
they came into the country of Moab, and continued there. And Elimelech
Naomi's husband died; and she was left, and her two sons. And they took
them wives of the women of Moab; the name of the one was Orpah, and the
name of the other Ruth: and they dwelt there about ten years. And Mahlon
and Chilion died also both of them; and the woman was left of her two
sons and her husband.

Then she arose with her daughters in law, that she might return from the
country of Moab for she had heard in the country of Moab how that the
Lord had visited his people in giving them bread. Wherefore she went
forth out of the place where she was, and her two daughters in law with
her; and they went on the way to return unto the land of Judah.

And Naomi said unto her two daughters in law, Go, return each to her
mother's house the Lord deal kindly with you, as ye have dealt with the
dead, and with me. The Lord grant you that ye may find rest, each of you
in the house of her husband.

Then she kissed them; and they lifted up their voice, and wept. And they
said unto her, Surely we will return with thee unto thy people.

And Naomi said, Turn again, my daughters: why will ye go with me? are
there yet any more sons in my womb, that they may be your husbands? Turn
again, my daughters, go your way; for I am too old to have a husband. If
I should say, I have hope, if I should have a husband also to night, and
should also bear sons; would ye tarry for them till they were grown?
would ye stay for them from having husbands? nay, my daughters; for it
grieveth me much for your sakes that the hand of the Lord is gone out
against me.

And they lifted up their voice, and wept again: and Orpah kissed her
mother in law but Ruth cleave unto her.

And she said, Behold, thy sister in law is gone back unto her people, and
unto her gods return thou after thy sister in law.

And Ruth said, Entreat me not to leave thee, or to return from following
after thee: for whither thou goest, I will go; and where thou lodgest, I
will lodge: thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God: Where thou
diest, will I die, and there will I be buried: the Lord do so to me, and
more also, if ought but death part thee and me.

When she saw that she was steadfastly minded to go with her, then she
left speaking unto her.

So they two went until they came to Beth-lehem.--Ruth i, 1-19.




RUTH AND BOAZ.


And Naomi had a kinsman of her husband's, a mighty man of wealth, of the
family of Elimelech; and his name was Boaz.

And Ruth the Moabitess said unto Naomi, Let me now go to the field, and
glean ears of corn after him in whose sight I shall find grace. And she
said unto her, Go, my daughter. And she went, and came and gleaned in the
field after the reapers; and her hap was to light on a part of the field
belonging unto Boaz, who was of the kindred of Elimelech.

And, behold, Boaz came from Bethlehem, and said unto the reapers, The
Lord be with you. And they answered him, The Lord bless thee. Then said
Boaz unto his servant that was set over the reapers, Whose damsel is
this? And the servant that was set over the reapers answered and said, It
is the Moabitish damsel that came back with Naomi out of the country of
Moab: and she said, I pray you, let me glean and gather after the reapers
among the sheaves: so she came, and hath continued even from the morning
until now, that she tarried a little in the house.

Then said Boaz unto Ruth, Hearest thou not, my daughter? Go not to glean
in another field, neither go from hence, but abide here fast by my
maidens: let thine eyes be on the field that they do reap, and go thou
after them: have I not charged the young men that they shall not touch
thee? and when thou art athirst, go unto the vessels, and drink of that
which the young men have drawn.

Then she fell on her face and bowed herself to the ground, and said unto
him, Why have I found grace in thine eyes, that thou shouldest take
knowledge of me, seeing I am a stranger?

And Boaz answered and said unto her, It hath fully been shewed me, all
that thou hast done unto thy mother in law since the death of thine
husband: and how thou hast left thy father and thy mother, and the land
of thy nativity, and art come unto a people which thou knewest not
heretofore. The Lord recompense thy work, and a full reward be given thee
of the Lord God of Israel, under whose wings thou art come to trust.

Then she said, Let me find favor in thy sight, my lord; for that thou
hast comforted me, and for that thou hast spoken friendly unto thine
handmaid, though I be not like unto one of thine handmaidens.

And Boaz said unto her, At mealtime come thou hither, and eat of the
bread, and dip thy morsel in the vinegar. And she sat beside the reapers:
and he reached her parched corn, and she did eat, and was sufficed, and
left. And when she was risen up to glean, Boaz commanded his young men,
saying, Let her glean even among the sheaves, and reproach her not: and
let fall also some of the handfuls of purpose for her, and leave them,
that she may glean them and rebuke her not.

So she gleaned in the field until even, and beat out that she had
gleaned: and it was about an ephah of barley.--Ruth ii, 1-17.




THE RETURN OF THE ARK.


And the ark of the Lord was in the country of the Philistines seven
months. And the Philistines called for the priests and the diviners,
saying, What shall we do to the ark of the Lord? tell us wherewith we
shall send it to his place. And they said, If ye send away the ark of the
God of Israel, send it not empty; but in any wise return him a trespass
offering: then ye shall be healed, and it shall be known to you why his
hand is not removed from you. Then said they, What shall be the trespass
offering which we shall return to him? They answered, Five golden
emerods, and five golden mice, according to the number of the lords of
the Philistines: for one plague was on you all, and on your lords.
Wherefore ye shall make images of your emerods, and images of your mice
that mar the land; and ye shall give glory unto the God of Israel:
peradventure he will lighten his hand from off you, and from off your
gods, and from off your land. Wherefore then do ye harden your hearts, as
the Egyptians and Pharaoh hardened their hearts? when he had wrought
wonderfully among them, did they not let the people go, and they
departed? Now therefore make a new cart, and take two milch kine, on
which there hath come no yoke, and tie the kine to the cart, and bring
their calves home from them: and take the ark of the Lord, and lay it
upon the cart; and put the jewels of gold, which ye return him for a
trespass offering, in a coffer by the side thereof; and send it away,
that it may go. And see, if it goeth up by the way of his own coast to
Beth-shemesh, then he hath done us this great evil: but if not, then we
shall know that it is not his hand that smote us; it was a chance that
happened to us.

And the men did so; and took two milch kine, and tied them to the cart,
and shut up their calves at home: and they laid the ark of the Lord upon
the cart, and the coffer with the mice of gold and the images of their
emerods. And the kine took the straight way to the way of Beth-shemesh,
and went along the highway, lowing as they went, and turned not aside to
the right hand or to the left; and the lords of the Philistines went
after them, unto the border of Beth-shemesh. And they of Beth-shemesh
were reaping their wheat harvest in the valley: and they lifted up their
eyes, and saw the ark, and rejoiced to see it. And the cart came into the
field of Joshua, a Beth-shemite, and stood there, where there was a great
stone: and they clave the wood of the cart, and offered the kine a burnt
offering unto the Lord.

And the Levites took down the ark of the Lord, and the coffer that was
with it, wherein the jewels of gold were, and put them on the great
stone: and the men of Beth-shemesh offered burnt offerings and sacrificed
sacrifices the same day unto the Lord.--1 Samuel vi, 1-5.




SAUL AND DAVID.


And it came to pass, when he had made an end of speaking unto Saul, that
the soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of David, and Jonathan loved
him as his own soul. And Saul took him that day, and would let him go no
more home to his father's house.

Then Jonathan and David made a covenant, because he loved him as his own
soul. And Jonathan stripped himself of the robe that was upon him, and
gave it to David, and his garments, even to his sword, and to his bow,
and to his girdle.

And David went out withersoever Saul sent him, and behaved himself
wisely: and Saul set him over the men of war, and he was accepted in the
sight of all the people, and also in the sight of Saul's servants.

And it came to pass as they came, when David was returned from the
slaughter of the Philistine, that the women came out of all cities of
Israel, singing and dancing, to meet king Saul, with tabrets, with joy,
and with instruments of music. And the women answered one another as they
played, and said, Saul hath slain his thousands, and David his ten
thousands.

And Saul was very wroth, and the saying displeased him; and he said,
"They have ascribed unto David ten thousands, and to me they have
ascribed but thousands: and what can he have more but the kingdom?"  And
Saul eyed David from that day and forward.

And it came to pass on the morrow, that the evil spirit from God came
upon Saul, and he prophesied in the midst of the house: and David played
with his hand, as at other times: and there was a javelin in Saul's hand.
And Saul cast the javelin; for he said, I will smite David even to the
wall with it. And David avoided out of his presence twice.--1 Samuel
xviii, I-II.




DAVID SPARING SAUL.


And it came to pass, when Saul was returned from following the
Philistines, that it was told him, saying, Behold, David is in the
wilderness of Engedi. Then Saul took three thousand chosen men out of all
Israel, and went to seek David and his men upon the rocks of the wild
goats. And he came to the sheepcotes by the way, where was a cave; and
Saul went in to cover his feet: and David and his men remained in the
sides of the cave.

And the men of David said unto him, Behold the day of which the Lord said
unto thee, Behold, I will deliver thine enemy into thine hand, that thou
mayest do to him as it shall seem good unto thee. Then David arose, and
cut off the skirt of Saul's robe privily. And it came to pass afterward,
that David's heart smote him, because he had cut off Saul's skirt. And he
said unto his men, The Lord forbid that I should do this thing unto my
master, the Lord's anointed, to stretch forth mine hand against him,
seeing he is the anointed of the Lord.

So David stayed his servants with these words, and suffered them not to
rise against Saul. But Saul rose up out of the cave, and went on his way.
David also arose afterward, and went out of the cave, and cried after
Saul, saying, My lord the king. And when Saul looked behind him, David
stooped with his face to the earth and bowed himself.

And David said to Saul, Wherefore hearest thou men's words, saying,
Behold, David seeketh thy hurt? Behold, this day thine eyes have seen how
that the Lord had delivered thee to-day into mine hand in the cave: and
some bade me kill thee; but mine eye spared thee; and I said, I will not
put forth mine hand against my lord; for he is the Lord's anointed.
Moreover, my father, see, yea, see the skirt of thy robe in my hand: for
in that I cut off the skirt of thy robe, and killed thee not, know thou
and see that there is neither evil nor transgression in mine hand, and I
have not sinned against thee; yet thou huntest my soul to take it. The
Lord judge between me and thee, and the Lord avenge me of thee: but mine
hand shall not be upon thee. As saith the proverb of the ancients,
Wickedness proceedeth from the wicked: but mine hand shall not be upon
thee. After whom is the king of Israel come out? after whom dost thou
pursue? after a dead dog, after a flea. The Lord therefore be judge, and
judge between me and thee, and see, and plead my cause, and deliver me
out of thine hand.

And it came to pass, when David had made an end of speaking these words
unto Saul, that Saul said, Is this thy voice, my son David? And Saul
lifted up his voice, and wept. And he said to David, Thou art more
righteous than I: for thou hast rewarded me good, whereas I have rewarded
thee evil. And thou hast shewed this day how that thou hast dealt well,
with me: forasmuch as when the Lord had delivered me into thine hand,
thou killedst me not. For if a man find his enemy, will he let him go
well away? wherefore the Lord reward thee good for that thou hast done
unto me this day. And now, behold, I know well that thou shalt surely be
king, and that the kingdom of Israel shall be established in thine hand.
Swear now therefore unto me by the Lord, that thou wilt not cut off my
seed after me, and that thou wilt not destroy my name out of my father's
house.

And David sware unto Saul. And Saul went home; but David and his men gat
them up unto the hold.--2 Samuel xxiv, 2--22.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Dore Gallery of Bible
Illustrations, Volume 3, by Anonymous, Illustrated by Gustave Dore

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DORE BIBLE GALLERY, VOL. 3 ***

***** This file should be named 8703.txt or 8703.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/8/7/0/8703/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
