The Project Gutenberg eBook, ERPANET Case Study: Project Gutenberg, by
ERPANET


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

** This is a COPYRIGHTED Project Gutenberg eBook, Details Below **
**     Please follow the copyright guidelines in this file.     **




Title: ERPANET Case Study: Project Gutenberg

Author: ERPANET

Release Date: January 4, 2005  [eBook #14585]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ERPANET CASE STUDY: PROJECT
GUTENBERG***


Copyright (C) ERPANET 2004



ERPANET Case Study: Project Gutenberg

Table of Contents

Executive Summary                                            4
Chapter 1: The ERPANET Project                               5
Chapter 2: Scope of the Case Studies                         6
Chapter 3: Method of Working                                 8
Chapter 4: Project Gutenberg                                 9
Chapter 5: Details and circumstances of the Interviews       10
Chapter 6: Analysis                                          11
Perception and Awareness of Digital Preservation             11
Preservation Activity                                        12
Compliance Monitoring                                        14
Digital Preservation Costs                                    14
Future Outlook                                                14
Chapter 7: Conclusions                                        16



Executive Summary
Project Gutenberg is the first and largest collection of eBooks made
freely available to the public. The project philosophy is that the
greatest value of computers is not their computing power, but rather
their potential for the searchable storage and retrieval of library
materials. The premise for the project is that any object - whether
text, picture, sound or 3D image - that can be entered into a computer
can be replicated indefinitely. The eBooks generated by Project
Gutenberg are stored on two main servers and can then be downloaded to
local servers around the world. This case study differs form many other
ERPANET studies in that the project is volunteer-driven. As such, there
are no financial or business incentives to preserve the eBooks. The
real incentive lies in the belief that literary works in the public
domain should be freely accessible to as many people as possible for as
long as possible. By digitising everything in 'plain vanilla ASCII' as
well as many other formats, the eBooks are readable by over 99% of
computer operating systems. By avoiding proprietary formats whenever
possible, Project Gutenberg also helps to guarantee the long-term
survival of the bit streams of the eBooks. The combination of open
formats and the proliferation of copies downloaded around the world
should ensure that the Project Gutenberg eBooks currently in existence
are still accessible far into the future.



Chapter 1: The ERPANET Project
The European Commission and Swiss Confederation funded ERPANET Project
(1) (Electronic Resource Preservation and Access Network) works to
enhance the preservation of cultural and scientific digital objects
through raising awareness, providing access to experience, sharing
policies and strategies, and improving practices. To achieve these
goals ERPANET is building an active community of members and actors,
bringing together memory organisations (museums, libraries and
archives), ICT and software industry, research institutions, government
organisations, entertainment and creative industries, and commercial
sectors. ERPANET constructs authoritative information resources on
state-of-the-art developments in digital preservation, promotes
training, and provides advice and tools.

ERPANET consists of four partners and is directed by a management
committee, namely Seamus Ross (HATII, University of Glasgow; principal
director), Niklaus Bütikofer (Schweizerisches Bundesarchiv), Hans
Hofman (Nationaal Archief/National Archives of the Netherlands), and
Maria Guercio (ISTBAL, University of Urbino). At each of these nodes a
content editor supports their work, and Peter McKinney serves as a
co-ordinator to the project. An Advisory Committee with experts from
various organisations, institutions, and companies from all over Europe
gives advice and support to ERPANET.



Chapter 2: Scope of the Case Studies
While theoretical discussions on best practice call for urgent action
to ensure the survival of digital information, it is organisations and
institutions that are leading the drive to establish effective digital
preservation strategies (2). In order to understand the processes these
organisations are undertaking, ERPANET is conducting a series of case
studies in the area of digital preservation. In total, sixty case
studies, each of varying size, will investigate awareness, strategies,
and technologies used in an array of organisations. It is anticipated
that upwards of 500 organisations, institutions and public bodies will
eventually contribute to this research. The resulting corpus should
make a substantial contribution to our knowledge of practice in digital
preservation, and form the foundation for theory building and the
development of methodological tools. The value of these case studies
will come not only from the breadth of sectors included, but also
through the depth at which they will explore the issues.

ERPANET is deliberately and systematically approaching disparate
sectors from industry and business to facilitate discussion in areas
that have traditionally been unconnected. With these case studies
ERPANET will broaden the scope and understanding of digital
preservation through research and discussion. The case studies will be
published to improve the approaches and solutions being developed and
to reduce the redundancy of effort. The interviews are identifying
current practice not only in-depth within specific sectors, but also
cross-sectorally: what can the publishing sector learn from the
aeronautical sector? Eventually we aim to use this comparative data to
produce intra-sectoral overviews.
This cross-sectoral fertilisation is a main focus of ERPANET as laid
out in its Digital Preservation Charter (3). It is of primary
importance that disparate groups are given a mechanism through which to
come together as best practices for digital preservation are
established in each sector.

Aims
The principal aims of the study are to:
* build a picture of methods and match against context to produce best
practices;
* accumulate and make accessible information about practices;
* identify issues for further research;
* enable cross-sectoral practice comparisons;
* enable the development of assessment tools;
* create material for training seminars and workshops; and,
* develop contacts.

Potential sectors have been selected to represent a wide scope of
information production and digital preservation activity. Each sector
may present a unique perspective on digital preservation.
Organisational and sectoral requirements, awareness of digital
preservation, resources available, and the nature of the digital object
created place unique and specific demands on organisations. Each of the
case studies is being balanced to ensure a range of institutional
types, sizes, and locations.

The main areas of investigation included:
* perception and awareness of risk associated with information loss;
* understanding how digital preservation affects the organisation;
* identifying what actions have been taken to prevent data loss;
* the process of monitoring actions; and,
* mechanisms for determining future requirements.

Within each section, the questions were designed to bring
organisational perceptions and practices into focus. Questions were
aimed at understanding impressions held on digital preservation and the
impact that it has had on the respective organisation, exploring the
awareness in the sector of the issues and the importance that it was
accorded, and how it affected organisational thinking. The participants
were asked to describe, what in their views, were the main problems
associated with digital preservation and what value information
actually had in the sector. Through this the reasons for preserving
information as well as the risks associated with not preserving it
became clear.

The core of the questionnaire focused on the actions taken at corporate
level and sectoral levels in order to uncover policies, strategies, and
standards currently employed to tackle digital preservation concerns,
including selection, preservation techniques, storage, access, and
costs. Questions allowed participants to explore the future commitment
from their organisation and sector to digital preservation activities,
and where possible to relate their existing or planned activities to
those being conducted in other organisations with which they might be
familiar.

Ten organisations in each sector, and three people within each
organisation are targeted for each study. In reality this proved to be
problematic. Even when organisations are identified and interviews
timetabled, targets often withdrew just before we began the interview
process. Some withdrew after seeing the data collection instrument, due
in part to the time/effort involved, and others (we suspect) dropped
out because they realised that the expertise was not available within
their organisation to answer the questions. The perception of risks
that might arise through contributing to these studies worried some
organisations, particularly those from sectors where competitive
advantage is imperative, or liability and litigation issues especially
worrying. Non-disclosure agreements that stipulated that we would
neither name an organisation nor disclose any information that would
enable readers to identify them were used to reduce risks associated
with contributing to this study. In some cases the risk was still
deemed too great and organisations withdrew.

Chapter 3: Method of Working
Initial desk-based sectoral analysis provides ERPANET researchers with
essential background knowledge. They then conduct the primary research
by interview. In developing the interview instrument, the project
directors and editors reviewed other projects that had used interviews
to accumulate evidence on issues related to digital preservation. Among
these the methodologies used in the Pittsburgh Project and InterPARES I
for target selection and data collection were given special attention.
The Pittsburgh approach was considered too narrow a focus and provided
insufficient breadth to enable full sectoral comparisons. On the other
hand, the InterPARES I data collection methodology proved much too
detailed and lengthy, which we felt might become an obstacle at the
point of interpretation of the data. Moreover, it focused closely on
recordkeeping systems within organisations.

The ERPANET interview instrument takes account of the strengths and
weaknesses from both, developing a more focussed questionnaire designed
to target a range of strategic points in the organisations under
examination. The instrument (4) was created to explore three main areas
of enquiry within an organisation: awareness of digital preservation
and the issues surrounding it; digital preservation strategies (both in
planning and in practice); and future requirements within the
organisation for this field. Within these three themes, distinct layers
of questions elicit a detailed discovery of the state of the entire
digital preservation process within participants' institutions. Drawing
on the experience that the partners of ERPANET have in this method of
research, another important detail has been introduced. Within
organisations, three categories of employee were identified for
interview: an Information Systems or Technology Manager, Business
Manager, and Archivist / Records Manager. In practice, this usually
involved two members of staff with knowledge of the organisation's
digital preservation activities, and a high level manager who provided
an overview of business and organisational issues. This methodology has
allowed us to discover the extent of knowledge and practice in
organisations, to understand the roles of responsibility and problem
ownership, and to appreciate where the drive towards digital
preservation is initiated within organisations.

The task of selecting the sectors for the case studies and of
identifying the respective companies to be studied is incumbent upon
the management board. They compiled a first list of sectors at the very
beginning of the project. But sector and company selection is an
ongoing process, and the list is regularly updated and complemented.
The Directors are assisted in this task by an advisory committee (5).


Chapter 4: Project Gutenberg
Project Gutenberg produces free electronic versions of literature and
reference works that are in the public domain. As the project has only
a few paid staff members (6), the majority of eBooks are scanned and
edited by volunteers. Available via the Internet since 1994, Project
Gutenberg is the oldest producer of freely accessible, electronic books
(eBooks). From 1971 until 1997 over 1,100 eBooks were created. In the
first eleven weeks of 2004 alone, three hundred new eBooks have been
generated. There are now over 13,380 eBooks available and the
production of eBooks is constantly increasing. Project Gutenberg is
dedicated to making these resources available to the general public in
a form that the vast majority of the computers, programs and people can
easily read (ASCII). However, most texts are available in a wide range
of formats for users to select.

New features have been added recently to Project Gutenberg's core
services. Specifically, the new Radio Gutenberg (7) makes audio and
video files accessible to the public for download as well as broadcasts
on their two radio channels and Gutenberg Music (8) makes digitised
music sheets accessible. This project focuses only on the preservation
of the eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (PGLAF) is a
recognised charitable organization by the US Internal Revenue Service.

http://www.gutenberg.net


Chapter 5: Details and circumstances of the Interviews
Michael Hart, Founder and Director of Project Gutenberg and Dr. Greg
Newby, CEO of the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
completed the questionnaire and participated in email communications
between March and April 2004.

Chapter 6: Analysis
This section presents an analysis of the data collected during the case
study. It is organised to mirror the sequence of topics in the
questionnaire.
* Perception and Awareness of Digital Preservation
* Preservation Activity
* Compliance Monitoring
* Digital Preservation Costs
* Future Outlook


Perception and Awareness of Digital Preservation

Project Gutenberg is one of the earliest web sites on the internet and
one of the earliest digital libraries in existence. They have been
active in creating eBooks for over thirty years and are aware of the
social benefits to be gained through preserving these resources for
public access. Project Gutenberg ensures that all eBooks are available
in plain text and other open formats to avoid obsolescence. The eBooks
are uploaded to two main servers (9) and can then be mirrored by over
thirty sites worldwide. The combination of open formats and many copies
should ensure that access to these digitised literary works is
preserved for the long-term.


The Main Problems

The major long-term problem lies in ensuring that copyright laws are
respected for all of the digitised works made accessible by Project
Gutenberg. Mirror sites exist in many countries around the world and,
as such, ensuring that copyright laws are respected in each can be
difficult. However, no eBook will be posted to the main site in the
U.S. without gaining copyright clearance.  Recent extensions to
copyright laws in the U.S. and Europe have presented new challenges for
the Project Gutenberg team. This is because no new works will be
released to the public domain until 2018. Hart believes that these
extensions to copyright laws benefit 'very few copyright holders at the
expense of universal access to literature and knowledge'(10). These
changes will impact the amount of research that needs to be done before
an eBook can be digitised and made available.


Asset Value and Risk Exposure

Project Gutenberg exists to make literature and reference materials
freely accessible to the general public in a digitised format. As
mentioned above, Michael Hart believes that free access to literary
works is vital for enabling the sharing of knowledge, art, music and
culture.



Regulatory Environment

Project Gutenberg must adhere to U.S. laws involving operation as a
not-for-profit corporation. However, these regulations are not sector
specific. Project Gutenberg must be exceedingly careful to respect U.S.
copyright laws regarding the works that they digitise and make
available over the Internet. However, once a publication has been
verified as being in the public domain, there are no other legal
restrictions affecting Project Gutenberg.


Preservation Activity

Policies and Strategies

Project Gutenberg scans literary works and employs OCR technology to
create eBooks. In some cases, eBooks are typed in by hand. The eBooks
are then edited by a team of volunteer proof-readers. There are
procedures and guidelines available online for volunteers to consult
when scanning and editing texts for Project Gutenberg to ensure that
all eBooks follow a standard format. Once the eBook has been produced,
it is uploaded to two main servers. The eBook is made accessible via
the official Project Gutenberg website and the Internet Archive site
and on over thirty mirror sites around the world. As there are no
access or distribution issues, Project Gutenberg encourages users to
save copies of the eBooks to CD or DVD.

Project Gutenberg believes that by generating a multitude of versions -
those stored on the main servers, on local servers (through mirror
sites) and those downloaded to CD and DVD - will ensure that the bit
stream of the literary work is preserved for access. This embodies the
philosophy of the LOCKSS strategy. LOCKSS 'uses the caching technology
of the web to collect pages of journals as they are published, allowing
libraries to take physical custody of selected electronic titles they
purchase'(11).  LOCKSS was inspired by the words of Thomas Jefferson
who said "let us save what remains: not by vaults and locks which fence
them from the public eye and use in consigning them to the waste of
time, but by such a multiplication of copies, as shall place them
beyond the reach of accident." (12)


Selection

Project Gutenberg aims to make digitised versions of popular literature
and reference materials in the public domain freely accessible to the
general public. As copyright expires, publications can be freely
replicated and distributed. Many of these works are out of print. By
digitising the out of print works, Project Gutenberg feels that they
are saving the publications from 'obscurity and ultimate oblivion'(13).
Basically, all of the texts can be classified into three categories:
light literature (such as Alice in Wonderland), heavy literature (such
as Shakespeare and Dante) and references (such as Roget's Thesaurus).
Mathematical and scientific works are also made available including the
Human Genome. There are no real restrictions to what Project Gutenberg
will make accessible. As long as the material is in the public domain,
they can be digitised and submitted to Project Gutenberg. However,
Project Gutenberg aims to benefit the widest possible audience and
therefore prioritise the digitisation of popular literature and
reference materials rather than extremely specialised works. Project
Gutenberg already have texts in over 31 languages and are especially
keen to increase their multilingual holdings.


Preservation

Project Gutenberg already has numerous plain text files that are 20-30
years old. In that time, many file formats have come and gone while
plain text is still readable on virtually all computers. The use of
plain text will also help to insure against future obsolescence. All
Project Gutenberg eBooks are created as plain ASCII text files. This
means that people with 'Apples and Ataris all the way to the old
homebrew Z80 computers' (14) as well as Mac and UNIX users are all able
to read the text files. Any open format can be submitted but the
Project Gutenberg team will also generate plain ASCII (15) text files.
Project Gutenberg encourages users to created new formats from the
plain text files to suit their individual needs. Once the eBook has
been generated and edited by volunteers, it is uploaded to two main
servers. The first is the Project Gutenberg site itself and the other
is the Internet Archive site. From this point, mirror sites can
download the redundant files to their own sites and store them on their
own servers.

Project Gutenberg uses the unique eBook number as the file name.
Therefore, if the eBook is the 10001 plain text file created it will be
named 10001. txt. Project Gutenberg will accept as many open file
formats as volunteers are willing to submit, but will also generate a
plain text version. Additional versions in other formats will be named
accordingly but with different file extensions (e.g., html, pdf, xml).
Each eBook has its own subdirectory that contains all versions of the
eBook.

Project Gutenberg have volunteers representing a wide range of sectors
(cultural heritage, government and higher education). Through these
affiliations, they keep up to date with digital preservation
developments. Project Gutenberg staff have ties with many
organisational leaders and informal collaborations on best practices
are common.


Access

The eBooks are catalogued by Project Gutenberg volunteers to include
the author, the author's dates of birth & death, language, eBook
number, and the Library of Congress classification to enhance online
searching capabilities. As the publications that Project Gutenberg aims
to make accessible are already in the public domain, restricting access
is not really an issue. Project Gutenberg is mirrored in over thirty
sites around the world. As such, they cannot accurately estimate the
number of downloads that take place across all of the mirrored sites,
but state that the equivalent of 1 million eBooks are downloaded each
month from the main central server (16). In an effort to increase
accessibility by non-English users, eBooks can be generated and
submitted in any language.

Project Gutenberg uses Dublin Core to describe their electronic
resources to enable resource discovery.


Compliance Monitoring

There are no external requirements that Project Gutenberg must meet.
However, Distributed Proof-readers (17) work to edit and ensure that
the eBook content is as accurate as possible. The eBook goes through
two rounds of proofreading where it may be examined by hundreds of
volunteers. Once the eBook has been proofread, it goes to the
post-processing stage. 'The ultimate goal of post-processing is to
create a plain text eBook with consistent formatting throughout, which
contains as few errors as possible, and which accurately reflects the
intentions of the author' (18). Project Gutenberg citations - for
example in the Online Computer Library Center (OCLC)- appear as their
own editions and, as such, do not comply with any particular paper
edition. In some cases Project Gutenberg editions are listed as the
only edition in existence. Project Gutenberg makes every effort to
ensure that they comply with U.S. copyright laws and encourages all
volunteers to verify that materials proposed for digitisation are in
the public domain. Guidance and advice on undertaking this research is
provided on the project website. However, the Project Gutenberg team
are ultimately responsible for verifying public domain status and
require that a copy of the title page be submitted for each proposed
publication to assist in this process.


Digital Preservation Costs

A registered charity, Project Gutenberg relies on donations to pay
their few dedicated staff members and for operational costs. Nearly 100
per cent of the operational budget is focused on preservation. In terms
of storage costs, the project founder believes that as disk drives
become larger and cheaper, the price of putting eBooks on computers
will become negligible (19).


Future Outlook

Project Gutenberg has already been implemented in Australia and Europe.
Project Gutenberg of Canada is being founded in the near future.
Project Gutenberg also hopes "to also create such projects in Africa,
Asia, and other regions. In particular, they hope to create projects by
which e-books can reach the masses via digital radio links to
solar-powered PDAs. In addition, Project Gutenberg will be adding more
multimedia e-books: paintings, sculptures, music, audio e-books,
movies, etc., along with a wider variety of text formats." (20)

Project Gutenberg will continue digitising literary works and aim to
offer over 10,000,000 eBooks in over 100 languages by the time they
celebrate their 50th anniversary in 2021. Project Gutenberg aim to
enable the migration on request of their plain text files. This would
mean that the plain text version could be generated in any type of file
requested on the fly. This is currently in test mode. Project Gutenberg
is also investigating creating the eBooks as born XML to allow easier
creation of other formats on demand (21).


Chapter 7: Conclusions

As the first and largest collection of eBooks, Project Gutenberg has
been preserving electronic publications and making them accessible for
over thirty years.  By adhering to strict guidelines regarding the
format of the eBook (plain text) for access and readability, Project
Gutenberg has also ensured that their electronic resources can be
preserved and migrated easily to other formats as needed.  By uploading
the eBooks to two main servers and by mirroring the Project Gutenberg
database on sites around the world they ensure that backup versions of
the eBooks are readily available if necessary. This multi-distributed
approach is similar to the preservation strategy Lots of Copies Keeps
Stuff Safe (LOCKSS) that is gaining worldwide interest. The combination
of open formats and the proliferation of copies downloaded around the
world should ensure that Project Gutenberg eBooks currently in
existence and indeed any new eBooks created, are still accessible far
into the future.

End Notes:

(1) ERPANET is a European Commission funded project (IST-2001-32706).
See www.erpanet.org for more details and available products.
(2) Chapters 2 and 3 are taken from 'Cross-sectoral Development of
Digital Preservation Strategies: ERPANET and the Expansion of
Knowledge', given at Preservation of Electronic Records. New Knowledge
and Decision-making, Symposium 2003.
(3) The Charter is ERPANET's statement on the principles of digital
preservation. It has been drafted in order to achieve a concerted and
co-ordinated effort in the area of digital preservation by all
organisations and individuals that have an interest and share these
concerns.
http://www.erpanet.org/www/content/documents/Digitalpreservationcharterv
4_1.pdf.
(4) See Appendix. We include the questionnaire to encourage comment and
in the hope that other groups conducting similar research can use the
ideas contained within it to foster comparability between different
studies.
(5) See www.erpanet.org for the composition of this committee.
(6) Paid staff are financed through donations.
http://www.gutenberg.net/donate
(7) Radio Gutenberg http://www.gutenberg.net/audio/
(8) Gutenberg Music http://www.gutenberg.net/music/
(9) The two main servers are located at ibiblio: the public's library
and digital archive (ftp.ibiblio.org) and the Internet Archive
(ftp.archive.org).
(10) From an interview with Michael Hart: The Second Gutenberg
http://promo.net/pg/upi_interview_05_02.html
(11) http://lockss.stanford.edu/projectdescbrief.htm
(12) Jefferson, Thomas. [1791] 1984. Thomas Jefferson to Ebenezer
Hazard, Philadelphia, February 18, 1791. In Thomas Jefferson: Writings:
Autobiography, Notes on the State of Virginia, Public and Private
Papers, Addresses, Letters, edited by Merrill D. Peterson. New York:
Library of America (taken from LOCKSS website
http://lockss.stanford.edu/)
(13) From an interview with Michael Hart: The Second Gutenberg
http://promo.net/pg/upi_interview_05_02.html
(14) http://promo.net/pg/history.html
(15) American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII)
(16) From an interview with Michael Hart: The Second Gutenberg
http://promo.net/pg/upi_interview_05_02.html
(17) Distributed Proofreaders
http://www.distributedproofreaders.net/c/default.php
(18) Post-proofing FAQ
http://www.distributedproofreaders.net/c/faq/post_proof.php
(19) From an interview with Michael Hart: The Second Gutenberg
http://promo.net/pg/upi_interview_05_02.html
(20) Michael Hart quoted in Project Gutenberg Progresses by Paula J.
Hane, Information Today Volume 21 No. 5
http://www.infotoday.com/it/may04/hane1.shtml
(21) Project Gutenberg Progresses by Paula J. Hane in Information Today
Volume 21 No. 5 http://www.infotoday.com/it/may04/hane1.shtml


(c) ERPANET 2004



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ERPANET CASE STUDY: PROJECT
GUTENBERG***


******* This file should be named 14585.txt or 14585.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/4/5/8/14585


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.
This particular work is one of the few copyrighted individual works
included with the permission of the copyright holder.  Information on
the copyright owner for this particular work and the terms of use
imposed by the copyright holder on this work are set forth at the
beginning of this work.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***
