Project Gutenberg's Thoughts I Met on the Highway, by Ralph Waldo Trine

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Thoughts I Met on the Highway

Author: Ralph Waldo Trine

Release Date: May 15, 2006 [EBook #18392]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THOUGHTS I MET ON THE HIGHWAY ***




Produced by Roger Frank and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





Thoughts I Met On the Highway

Words Of Friendly Cheer
From "The Life Books"

By
Ralph Waldo Trine

New York
Dodd, Mead & Company
1919

Copyright 1912
By Ralph Waldo Trine

       *       *       *       *       *

BY RALPH WALDO TRINE

"The Life Books"

IN THE HOLLOW OF HIS HAND
THE NEW ALINEMENT OF LIFE
THE LAND OF LIVING MEN
WHAT ALL THE WORLD'S A-SEEKING
IN TUNE WITH THE INFINITE;
  or Fullness of Peace, Power and Plenty
THE HIGHER POWERS OF MIND AND SPIRIT.
THIS MYSTICAL LIFE OF OURS
  A volume of selections for each week through the year,
  from the Author's complete works.

The "Life" Booklets

ON THE OPEN ROAD
THOUGHTS I MET ON THE HIGHWAY
THE WINNING OF THE BEST
THE GREATEST THING EVER KNOWN
EVERY LIVING CREATURE
CHARACTER-BUILDING THOUGHT POWER

DODD, MEAD & COMPANY
NEW YORK

       *       *       *       *       *

Thoughts are forces--like builds like and like attracts like. Thoughts
of strength both build strength from within and attract it from without.
Thoughts of weakness actualize weakness from within and attract it from
without. Courage begets strength, fear begets weakness. And so courage
begets success, fear begets failure.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Any way the old world goes
      Happy be the weather!
    With the red thorn or the rose
      Singin' all together!
    Don't you see that sky o' blue!
      Good Lord painted it for you

    Reap the daisies in the dew
      Singin' all together!
    Springtime sweet, an' frosty fall
      Happy be the weather!
    Earth has gardens for us all,
      Goin' on together.

    Sweet the labor in the light,
      To the harvest's gold and white--
    Till the toilers say "Good night,"
      Singin' all together!

       *       *       *       *       *

There is no quality that exerts more good, is of greater service to all
mankind during the course of the ordinary life, than the mind and the
heart that goes out in an all-embracing love for all, that is the
generator and the circulator of a genuine, hearty, wholesome sympathy
and courage and good cheer, that is not disturbed or upset by the
passing occurrence little or great, but that is serene, tranquil, and
conquering to the end, that is looking for the best, that is finding the
best, and that is inspiring the best in all. There is moreover, no
quality that when genuine brings such rich returns to its possessor by
virtue of the thoughts and the feelings that it inspires and calls forth
from others and that come back laden with their peaceful, stimulating,
healthful influences for you.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Out of the night that covers me,
      Black as the Pit from pole to pole,
    I thank whatever gods may be
      For my unconquerable soul.

    In the fell clutch of circumstance
      I have not winced nor cried aloud.
    Under the bludgeoning of chance
      My head is bloody, but unbowed.

    Beyond this place of wrath and tears
      Looms but the horror of the shade,
    And yet the menace of the years
      Finds and shall find me, unafraid.

    It matters not how strait the gate
      How charged with punishment the scroll,
    I am the master of my fate;
      I am the captain of my soul.

    _William Earnest Henley_

       *       *       *       *       *

Thought is the great builder in human life: it is the determining
factor. Continually think thoughts that are good, and your life will
show forth in goodness, and your body in health and beauty. Continually
think evil thoughts, and your life will show forth in evil, and your
body in weakness and repulsiveness. Think thoughts of love, and you will
love and will be loved. Think thoughts of hatred, and you will hate and
will be hated. Each follows its kind.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Every day is a fresh beginning,
      Every morning is the world made new;
    You who are weary of sorrow and sinning,
      Here is a beautiful hope for you,
      A hope for me and a hope for you.

    All the past things are past and over,
      The tasks are done, and the tears are shed.
    Yesterday's errors let yesterday cover;
      Yesterday's wounds, which smarted and bled,
      Are healed with the healing which night has shed.

    Every day is a fresh beginning,
      Listen, my soul, to the glad refrain,
    And, spite of old sorrow and older sinning,
      And puzzles forecasted, and possible pain,
      Take heart with the day and begin again.

       *       *       *       *       *

Each morning is a fresh beginning. We are, as it were, just beginning
life. We have it _entirely_ in our own hands. And when the morning with
its fresh beginning comes, all yesterdays should be yesterdays, with
which we have nothing to do. Sufficient is it to know that the way we
lived our yesterday has determined for us our today. And, again, when
the morning with its fresh beginning comes, all tomorrows should be
tomorrows, with which we have nothing to do. Sufficient to know that the
way we live our today determines our tomorrow.

Simply the first hour of this new day, with all its richness and glory,
with all its sublime and eternity-determining possibilities, and each
succeeding hour as it comes, but _not before_ it comes--this is the
secret of character building. This simple method will bring any one to
the realization of the highest life that can be even conceived of, and
there is nothing in this connection that can be conceived of that cannot
be realized somehow, somewhen, somewhere.

       *       *       *       *       *

    The poem hangs on the berry-bush
      When comes the poet's eye,
    And the whole street is a masquerade
      When Shakespeare passes by.

       *       *       *       *       *

This same Shakespeare, whose mere passing causes all this commotion, is
the one who put into the mouth of one of his creations the words: "The
fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars, but in ourselves, that we are
underlings." And again he gave us a great truth when he said:

                    "Our doubts are traitors,
    And make us lose the good we oft might win
    By fearing to attempt."

There is probably no agent that brings us more undesirable conditions
than fear. We should live in fear of nothing, nor will we when we come
fully to know ourselves. An old French proverb runs:

    "Some of your griefs you have cured,
      And the sharpest you still have survived;
    But what torments of pain you endured
      From evils that never arrived."

Fear and lack of faith go hand in hand. The one is born of the other.
Tell me how much one is given to fear, and I will tell you how much he
lacks in faith. Fear is a most expensive guest to entertain, the same as
worry is: so expensive are they that no one can afford to entertain
them. We invite what we fear, the same as, by a different attitude of
mind, we invite and attract the influences and conditions we desire.

       *       *       *       *       *

To remain in nature always sweet and simple and humble, and therefore
strong.

    "Whatever the weather may be," says he,
    "Whatever the weather may be,
    It's the songs ye sing, an' the smiles ye wear,
    That's a-makin' the sun shine everywhere."

    _James Whitcomb Riley_

       *       *       *       *       *

Sweetness of nature, simplicity in manners and conduct, humility without
self-abasement, give the truly kingly quality to men, the queenly to
women, the winning to children, whatever the rank or the station may be.
The life dominated by this characteristic, or rather these closely
allied characteristics, is a natural well-spring of joy to itself and
sheds a continual benediction upon all who come within the scope of its
influence. It makes for a life of great beauty in itself, and it imparts
courage and hope and buoyancy to all others.

       *       *       *       *       *

    There is no thing we cannot overcome;
        Say not thy evil instinct is inherited,
        Or that some trait inborn makes thy whole life forlorn;
    And calls down punishment that is not merited.

    Back of thy parents and grandparents lies
        The Great Eternal Will! That too is thine
        Inheritance,--strong, beautiful, divine,
    Sure lever of success for one who tries.

    Earth has no claim the soul cannot contest;
        Know thyself part of the Eternal Source;
        Naught can stand before thy spirit's force:
    The soul's Divine Inheritance is best.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thought is at the bottom of all progress or retrogression, of all
success or failure, of all that is desirable or undesirable in human
life. The type of thought we entertain both creates and draws conditions
that crystallize about it, conditions exactly the same in nature as is
the thought that gives them form. Thoughts are forces, and each creates
of its kind, whether we realize it or not. The great law of the drawing
power of the mind, which says that like creates like, and that like
attracts like, is continually working in every human life, for it is one
of the great immutable laws of the universe. For one to take time to see
clearly the things one would attain to, and then to hold that ideal
steadily and continually before his mind, never allowing faith--his
positive thought-forces--to give way to or to be neutralized by doubts
and fears, and then to set about doing each day what his hands find to
do, never complaining, but spending the time that he would otherwise
spend in complaint in focusing his thought-forces upon the ideal that
his mind has built, will sooner or later bring about the full
materialization of that for which he sets out.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Beauty seen is never lost,
      God's colors all are fast;
    The glory of this sunset heaven
      Into my soul has passed,--
    A sense of gladness unconfined
      To mortal, date or clime;
    As the soul liveth, it shall live
      Beyond the years of time.
    Beside the mystic asphodels
      Shall bloom the home-born flowers,
    And new horizons flush and glow
      With sunset hues of ours.

    _Whittier_

       *       *       *       *       *

Would you remain always young, and would you carry all the joyousness
and buoyancy of youth into your maturer years? Then have care concerning
but one thing,--how you live in your thought world. It was the inspired
one, Gautama, the Buddha, who said,--"The mind is everything; what you
think you become." And the same thing had Ruskin in mind when he
said,--"Make yourselves nests of pleasant thoughts. None of us as yet
know, for none of us have been taught in early youth, what fairy palaces
we may build of beautiful thought--_proof against all adversity_." And
would you have in your body all the elasticity, all the strength, all
the beauty of your younger years? Then live these in your mind, making
no room for unclean thought, and you will externalize them in your body.
In the degree that you keep young in thought will you remain young in
body. And you will find that your body will in turn aid your mind, for
body helps mind the same as mind helps body.

       *       *       *       *       *

    There is a sacred Something on all ways--
        Something that watches through the Universe;
    One that remembers, reckons and repays,
        Giving us love for love, and curse for curse.

    _Edwin Markham_

       *       *       *       *       *

The power of every life, the very life itself, is determined by what it
relates itself to. God is immanent as well as transcendent. He is
creating, working, ruling in the universe today, in your life and in
mine, just as much as He ever has been. We are too apt to regard Him
after the manner of an absentee landlord, one who has set in operation
the forces of this great universe, and then taken Himself away.

In the degree, however, that we recognize Him as immanent as well as
transcendent, are we able to partake of His life and power. For in the
degree that we recognize Him as the Infinite Spirit of Life and Power
that is today, at this very moment, working and manifesting in and
through all, and then, in the degree that we come into the realization
of our oneness with this life, do we become partakers of, and so do we
actualize in ourselves the qualities of his life. In the degree that we
open ourselves to the inflowing tide of this immanent and transcendent
life, do we make ourselves channels through which the Infinite
Intelligence and Power can work.

       *       *       *       *       *

    The robber is robbed by his riches;
      The tyrant is dragged by his chain;
    The schemer is snared by his cunning,
      The slayer lies dead by the slain.

    _Edwin Markham_

       *       *       *       *       *

This is the law of prosperity: When apparent adversity comes, be not
cast down by it, but make the best of it, and always look forward for
better things, for conditions more prosperous. To hold yourself in this
attitude of mind is to set into operation subtle, silent, and
irresistible forces that sooner or later will actualize in material form
that which is today merely an idea. But ideas have occult power, and
ideas, when rightly planted and rightly tended, are the seeds that
actualize material conditions.

Never give a moment to complaint, but utilize the time that would
otherwise be spent in this way in looking forward and actualizing the
conditions you desire. Suggest prosperity to yourself. See yourself in a
prosperous condition. Affirm that you will before long be in a
prosperous condition. Affirm it calmly and quietly, but strongly and
confidently. Believe it, believe it absolutely. Expect it,--keep it
continually watered with expectation. You thus make yourself a magnet to
attract the things that you desire. Don't be afraid to suggest.

       *       *       *       *       *

    They might not need me--yet they might,
    I'll let my heart be just in sight.
    A smile so small as mine might be
    Precisely their necessity.

    _Emily Dickinson_

       *       *       *       *       *

The grander natures and the more thoughtful are always looking for and
in conversation dwelling on the better things in others. It is the rule
with but few, if any exceptions, that the more noble and worthy and
thoughtful the nature, the more it is continually looking for the best
there is to be found in every life. Instead of judging or condemning, or
acquiring the habit that eventually leads to this, it is looking more
closely to and giving its time to living more worthily itself.

It is in this way continually unfolding and expanding in beauty and in
power; it is finding an ever-increasing happiness by the admiration and
the love that such a life is always, even though all unconsciously,
calling to itself from all sources. It is the life that pays by many
fold.

       *       *       *       *       *

    We just shake hands at meeting
        With many that come nigh
    We nod the head in greeting
        To many that go by--

    But welcome through the gateway
        Our few old friends and true;
    Then hearts leap up, and straightway
        There's open house for you.
            Old friends.
        There's open house for you!

    _Gerald Massey_

       *       *       *       *       *

Many times the struggles are greater than we can ever know. We need more
gentleness and sympathy and compassion in our common human life. Then we
will neither blame nor condemn. Instead of blaming or condemning we will
sympathize.

          "Comfort one another.
    For the way is often dreary
    And the feet are often weary,
      And the heart is very sad.
    There is a heavy burden bearing,
    When it seems that none are caring,
      And we half forget that ever we were glad.

          "Comfort one another
    With the hand-clasp close and tender.
    With the sweetness love can render,
      And the looks of friendly eyes.
    Do not wait with grace unspoken,
    While life's daily bread is broken--
      Gentle speech is oft like manna from the skies."

And then when we fully realize the fact that selfishness is at the root
of all error, sin, and crime, and that ignorance is the basis of all
selfishness, with what charity we come to look upon the acts of all. It
is the ignorant man who seeks his own ends at the expense of the greater
whole. It is the ignorant man, therefore, who is the selfish man.

       *       *       *       *       *

To get up immediately when we stumble, face again to the light, and
travel on without wasting even a moment in regret.

       *       *       *       *       *

We are on the way from the imperfect to the perfect; some day, in this
life or some other, we shall reach our destiny. It is as much the part
of folly to waste time and cripple our forces in vain, unproductive
regrets in regard to the occurences of the past as it is to cripple our
forces through fears and forebodings for the future.

There is no experience in any life which if rightly recognized, rightly
turned and thereby wisely used, cannot be made of value; many times
things thus turned and used can be made sources of inestimable gain;
ofttimes they become veritable blessings in disguise.

       *       *       *       *       *

    'Tis the sweetest thing to remember
      If courage be on the wane.
    When the cold, dark days are over--
      Why, the birds go north again.

    _Ella Higginson_

       *       *       *       *       *

Nothing is more subtle than thought, nothing more powerful, nothing more
irresistible in its operations, when rightly applied and held to with a
faith and fidelity that is unswerving,--a faith and fidelity that never
knows the neutralizing effects of doubt and fear. If one have
aspirations and a sincere desire for a higher and better condition, so
far as advantages, facilities, associates, or any surroundings or
environments are concerned, and if he continually send out his highest
thought forces for the realization of these desires, and continually
water these forces with firm expectation as to their fulfillment, he
will sooner or later find himself in the realization of these desires,
and all in accordance with natural laws and forces.

We are born to be neither slaves nor beggars, but to dominion and to
plenty. This is our rightful heritage, if we will but recognize and lay
claim to it.

       *       *       *       *       *

    One who never turned his back, but marched breast forward,
    Never doubted clouds would break,
    Never dreamed, though right were worsted, wrong would triumph,
    Held we fall to rise, are baffled to fight better,
    Sleep to wake.

    _Robert Browning_

       *       *       *       *       *

Will is the steady directing power: it is concentration. It is the pilot
which, after the vessel is started by the mighty force within, puts it
on its right course and keeps it true to that course.

Will is the sun-glass which so concentrates and so focuses the sun's
rays that they quickly burn a hole through the paper that is held before
it. The same rays, not thus concentrated, not thus focused, would fall
upon the paper for days without any effect whatever. Will is the means
for the directing, the concentrating, the focusing, of the
thought-forces. Thought under wise direction,--this it is that does the
work, that brings results, that makes the successful career. One object
in mind which we never lose sight of; an ideal steadily held before the
mind, never lost sight of, never lowered, never swerved from,--this,
with _persistence_, determines all. Nothing can resist the power of
thought, when thus directed by will.

       *       *       *       *       *

    To stand by one's friend to the uttermost end,
    And fight a fair fight with one's foe;
    Never to quit and never to twit,
    And never to peddle one's woe.

    _George Brinton Chandler_

       *       *       *       *       *

The fearing, grumbling, worrying, vascillating do not succeed in
anything and generally live by burdening, in some form or another,
someone else. They stand in the way of, they prevent their own success;
they fail in living even an ordinary healthy, normal life; they cast a
blighting influence over and they act as a hindrance to all with whom
they at any time come in contact. The pleasures we take captive in life,
the growth and advancement we make, the pleasure and benefit our company
or acquaintanceship brings to others, the very desirability of our
companionship on the part of others--all depend upon the types of
thought we entertain and live most habitually with.

       *       *       *       *       *

    No one could tell me where my Soul might be.
    I searched for God but God eluded me.
    I sought my brother out and found all there.

    _Ernest Crosby._

       *       *       *       *       *

In the degree that we love will we be loved. Thoughts are forces. Each
creates of its kind. Each comes back laden with the effect that
corresponds to itself and of which it is the cause.

    "Then let your secret thoughts be fair--
    They have a vital part, and share
    In shaping words and moulding fate;
    God's system is so intricate."

If our heart goes out in love to all with whom we come in contact, we
inspire love and the same ennobling and warming influences of love
always return to us from those in whom we inspire them. There is a deep
scientific principle underlying the precept--If you would have all the
world love you, you must first love all the world.

       *       *       *       *       *

    It was only a glad "Good morning!"
          As she passed along the way,
    But it spread the morning glory
          Over the livelong day.

       *       *       *       *       *

By example and not by precept. By living, not by preaching. By doing,
not by professing. By living the life, not by dogmatizing as to how it
should be lived. There is no contagion equal to the contagion of life.
Whatever we sow, that shall we also reap, and each thing sown produces
of its kind. We can kill not only by doing another bodily injury
directly, but we can and we do kill by every antagonistic thought. Not
only do we thus kill, but while we kill we suicide. Many a man has been
made sick by having the ill thoughts of a number of people centered upon
him; some have been actually killed. Put hatred into the world and we
make it a literal hell. Put love into the world and heaven with all its
beauties and glories becomes a reality.

Not to love is not to live, or it is to live a living death. The life
that goes out in love to all is the life that is full, and rich, and
continually expanding in beauty and in power. Such is the life that
becomes ever more inclusive, and hence larger in its scope and
influence.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Give us men!
      Strong and stalwart ones:
    Men whom highest hope inspires,
    Men whom purest honour fires,
    Men who trample Self beneath them.
    Men who make their country wreathe them
        As her noble sons,
        Worthy of their sires,
    Men who never shame their mothers,
    Men who never fail their brothers,
    True, however false are others:
        Give us Men--I say again,
            Give us Men!

    _The Bishop of Exeter_

       *       *       *       *       *

_Not repression, but elevation._ Would that this could be repeated a
thousand times over! _No, a knowledge of the spiritual realities of life
prohibits asceticism, repression, the same as it prohibits license and
perverted use. To err on the one side is just as contrary to the ideal
life as to err on the other._ All things are for a purpose, all should
be used and enjoyed; but all should be rightly used, that they may be
fully enjoyed.

It is the all-around, fully developed we want,--not the ethereal,
pale-blooded man and woman, but the man and woman of flesh and blood,
for action and service here and now,--the man and woman strong and
powerful, with all the faculties and functions fully unfolded and used,
all in a royal and bounding condition, but all rightly subordinated. The
man and the woman of this kind, with the imperial hand of mastery upon
all,--standing, moving thus like a king, nay, like a very God,--such is
the man and such is the woman of power. Such is the ideal life: anything
else is one-sided, and falls short of it.

       *       *       *       *       *

    High thought and noble in all lands
        Help me; my soul is fed by such,
    But oh, at the touch of life and hands--
        The human touch!
    Warm, vital, close, life's Symbol dear,--
        These need I most, and now and here.

    _Richard Burton_

       *       *       *       *       *

Thoughts of strength both build strength from within and attract it from
without. Thoughts of weakness actualize weakness from within and attract
it from without. Courage begets strength, fear begets weakness. And so
courage begets success, fear begets failure. It is the man or the woman
of faith, and hence of courage, who is the master of circumstances, and
who make his or her power felt in the world. It is the man or the woman
who lacks faith and who as a consequence is weakened and crippled by
fears and forebodings, who is the creature of all passing occurences.

What one lives in his invisible thought world he is continually
actualizing in his visible material world. If he would have any
conditions different in the latter he must make the necessary change in
the former. A clear realization of this great fact would bring success
to thousands of men and women who all about us are now in the depths of
despair. It would bring health, abounding health and strength to
thousands now diseased and suffering. It would bring peace and joy to
thousands now unhappy and ill at ease.

       *       *       *       *       *

    I stay my haste, I make delays,
        For what avails this eager pace?
    I stand amid eternal ways,
        And what is mine shall know my face

    Asleep, awake, by night or day,
        The friends I seek are seeking me;
    No wind can drive my bark astray,
        Nor change the tide of destiny--

    The waters know their own, and draw
        The brooks that spring in yonder height;
    So flows the good with equal law
        Unto the soul of pure delight.

    The stars come nightly to the sky;
        The tidal wave unto the sea;
    Nor time, nor space, nor deep, nor high,
        Can keep my own away from me.

    _John Burroughs_

       *       *       *       *       *

The thing that pays, and that makes for a well balanced, useful, and
happy life, is not necessarily and is not generally a somber, pious
morality, or any standard of life that keeps us from a free, happy,
spontaneous use and enjoyment of all normal and healthy faculties,
functions, and powers, the enjoyment of all innocent pleasures--use, but
not abuse, enjoyment, but enjoyment through self-mastery and not through
license or perverted use, for it can never come that way. Look where we
will, in or out and around us, we will find that it is the middle
ground--neither poverty nor excessive riches, good wholesome use without
license, a turning into the bye-ways along the main road where innocent
and healthy God-sent and God-intended pleasures and enjoyments are to be
found; but never getting far enough away to lose sight of the road
itself. The middle ground it is that the wise man or woman plants foot
upon.

       *       *       *       *       *

    For evil poisons; malice shafts
      Like boomerangs return,
    Inflicting wounds that will not heal
      While rage and anger burn.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tell me how much one loves and I will tell you how much he has seen of
God. Tell me how much he loves and I will tell you how much he lives
with God. Tell me how much he loves and I will tell you how far into the
Kingdom of Heaven,--the kingdom of harmony, he has entered, for "love is
the fulfilling of the law."

And in a sense love is everything. It is the key to life, and its
influences are those that move the world. Live only in the thought of
love for all and you will draw love to you from all. Live in the thought
of malice or hatred, and malice and hatred will come back to you.

And so love inspires love; hatred breeds hatred. Love and good will
stimulate and build up the body; hatred and malice corrode and tear it
down. Love is a savor of life unto life; hatred is a savor of death unto
death.

    "There are loyal hearts, there are spirits brave,
      There are souls that are pure and true;
    Then give to the world the best you have,
      And the best will come back to you.

    "Give love, and love to _your_ heart will flow,
      A strength in your utmost need;
    Have faith, and a score of hearts will show
      Their faith in _your_ word and deed."

       *       *       *       *       *

    The kind of a man for you and me!
      He faces the world unflinchingly,
    And smiles as long as the world exists,
      With a knuckled faith and force like fists:
    He lives the life he is preaching of,
      And loves where most is the need of love;
    And feeling still, with a grief half glad,
      That the bad are as good as the good are bad,
    He strikes straight out for the right--and he
      Is the kind of a man for you and me!

    _James Whitcomb Riley_

       *       *       *       *       *

After a certain age is reached in any life, the prevailing tone and
condition of that life is the resultant of the mental habits of that
life. If one have mental equipment sufficient to find and to make use of
the Science of Thought in its application to scientific mind and body
building, habit and character building, there is little by way of
heredity, environment, attainment of which he or she will not be the
master.

One thing is very certain--the mental points of view, the mental
tendencies and habits at twenty-eight and thirty-eight will have
externalized themselves and will have stamped the prevailing conditions
of any life at forty-eight and fifty-eight and sixty-eight.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Who puts back into place a fallen bar.
      Or flings a rock out of a traveled road,
    His feet are moving toward the central star,
      His name is whispered in the Gods' abode.

    _Edwin Markham_

       *       *       *       *       *

We need changes from the duties and the cares of our accustomed everyday
life. They are necessary for healthy, normal living. We need
occasionally to be away from our friends, our relatives, from the
members of our immediate households. Such changes are good for us; they
are good for them. We appreciate them better, they us, when we are away
from them for a period, or they from us.

We need these changes to get the kinks out of our minds, our nerves, our
muscles--the cobwebs off our faces. We need them to whet again the edge
of appetite. We need them to invite the mind and the soul to new
possibilities and powers. We need them in order to come back with new
implements, or with implements redressed, sharpened, for the daily
duties.

We need periods of being by ourselves--_alone_. Sometimes a fortnight or
even a week will do wonders for one, unless he or she has drawn too
heavily upon the account. The simple custom, moreover, of taking an
hour, or even a half hour, _alone in the quiet_, in the midst of the
daily routine of life, would be the source of _inestimable gain_ for
countless numbers.

       *       *       *       *       *

    I know not where His islands lift
        Their fronded palms in air;
    I only know I cannot drift
        Beyond His love and care.

    _Whittier_

       *       *       *       *       *

We need more faith in everyday life--faith in the power that works for
good, faith in the Infinite God, and hence faith in ourselves created in
His image. And however things at times may seem to go, however dark at
times appearances may be, the knowledge of the fact that "the Supreme
Power has us in its charge as it has the suns and endless systems of
worlds in space," will give us the supreme faith that all is well with
us, the same as all is well with the world. "Thou wilt keep him in
perfect peace whose mind is stayed on Thee."

There is nothing firmer, and safer, and surer than Deity. Then, as we
recognize the fact that we have it in our own hands to open ourselves
ever more fully to this Infinite Power, and call upon it to manifest
itself in and through us, we will find in ourselves an ever increasing
sense of power. For in this way we are working in conjunction with it,
and it in turn is working in conjunction with us. We are then led into
the full realization of the fact that all things work together for good
to those that love the good.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Earth breaks up, time drops away,
    In flows Heaven with its new day.

    _Browning_





End of Project Gutenberg's Thoughts I Met on the Highway, by Ralph Waldo Trine

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THOUGHTS I MET ON THE HIGHWAY ***

***** This file should be named 18392.txt or 18392.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/3/9/18392/

Produced by Roger Frank and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
