The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is Going On
In It, Vol. 1, No. 54, November 18, 1897, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Great Round World and What Is Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 54, November 18, 1897
       A Weekly Magazine for Boys and Girls

Author: Various

Editor: Julia Truitt Bishop

Release Date: July 2, 2005 [EBook #16177]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.(www.pgdp.net)






[Illustration: THE GREAT ROUND
WORLD
AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT.]

    VOL. 1   NOVEMBER 18, 1897.   NO. 54

=Copyright, 1897, by THE GREAT ROUND WORLD Publishing Company.=

       *       *       *       *       *

The mayor of the city of Greater New York is Judge Robert A. Van Wyck.

New York city has just been passing through the most exciting election
that has fallen to her lot since she became a city.

This being the first election since the passing of the charter which
made New York the second largest city in the world, each political party
has been trying to get a man in for mayor who represented its own
especial way of thinking.

You will remember our telling you about the passing of the charter last
spring, and remarking that the man who would be made mayor of this great
city would have to rule over nearly three and a half millions of people.
He will also have to appoint officers of the government whose salaries
will amount to five hundred thousand dollars a year, and to control New
York's yearly income, which will amount to more than sixty millions of
the people's money.

On January 1st, 1898, Greater New York will embrace Staten Island, the
whole of Brooklyn as far down the Bay as Rockaway Beach, extend as far
north as Yonkers, and stretch across the country to the Sound, which it
will cross to take in Queens County on Long Island.

In the recent election one of the principal candidates for the mayoralty
was Mr. Seth Low, the president of Columbia University, who was mayor of
the city of Brooklyn in 1881, and was re-elected to the same office in
1883. Besides Mr. Low there were Gen. Benjamin F. Tracy, who was
Secretary of the Navy under President Harrison in 1889, Robert A. Van
Wyck, chief judge of the city court, and Mr. Henry George.

The contest was a very lively one, and each man who thus offered his
services to his city had to endure a severe course of the abuse which it
is the fashion nowadays to heap on any man who puts himself before the
public gaze.

Accusations have been brought by each party against the others, until,
to the unprejudiced outsider, it has seemed as if none of the candidates
selected was fit to hold office at all.

Judge Van Wyck and General Tracy have been accused of being so much
under the rule of their party leaders that they could not possibly give
New York honest government. Mr. Seth Low has been declared to be such an
autocrat that he would rule the city according to his own ideas, were
they good or bad. Mr. George was called a visionary person, who would
turn the world upside down if ever he came into power. These were, of
course, the opinions of the candidates' enemies. To their friends each
of them was felt to be the one man for whom the city had been waiting,
and whose election would insure the best possible government at the
lowest possible cost to the people.

You may judge for yourselves that all these opinions could not possibly
be true; and that therefore the candidates, as well as their parties,
must have had their good sides and their bad sides. We can only hope
that Judge Van Wyck, who was elected to the position by a very large
majority, may prove to be the best man for the place.

A very sad and painful turn was given to the election by the sudden
death of Mr. Henry George, one of the candidates.

Mr. George was a man who had made a world-wide reputation for himself as
the originator of the Single-Tax system.

The Single Tax is rather a hard matter for you to understand.

In brief, it was Mr. George's belief that poverty could be done away
with, and every man placed in a position where he could earn a
comfortable income, by abolishing all taxes upon industry and the
products of industry, and substituting one single tax on land. The
land-owners would then be the only persons taxed, and, according to Mr.
George's theory, the land tax would be so heavy that it would prevent
the men who do not want to use the land from keeping it out of the hands
of the many who would like to have it for homes or raising crops. There
being no longer any other taxes, the cost of living would be greatly
lessened, and every man would be able to earn enough to support his
family in comfort--and poverty would be at an end.

It is claimed for Mr. George's theory that no one has been able to find
an argument which disproves it; but at the same time it has not yet been
proved by practical use, and to many people it seems only a wonderful
idea which can never be brought into working order.

Be that as it may, Henry George was one of the really great men of our
century; and while the troubles between labor and capital exist, he can
never be forgotten.

Mr. George did not go into the campaign from any desire of personal gain
or profit. He felt that it was a critical moment in the history of the
city, and he ran for the mayoralty of Greater New York because he
thought he was needed by the people whom he so greatly loved.

The cause of the people was ever nearest his heart, and to benefit them
he willingly gave up the comfort of his quiet home, and the labor in
which he found his greatest pleasure, the writing of a book on the
"Science of Political Economy," which he had hoped would prove a greater
work than his famous "Progress and Poverty."

Mr. George was not, however, strong enough to stand the strain and worry
of a political campaign. His health gave way under it.

The night before his death he overtaxed his strength by speaking in
several different places, making several tiring speeches on the same
evening, and hurrying from one meeting to be in time for the next. Worn
out by the burdens which he was not strong enough to bear, he passed
away in his sleep, stricken with apoplexy.

Rich and poor alike mourn the loss of this great man. On the Sunday
after his death his body lay in state in New York that the people whom
he had loved so well might bid good-by to their friend. For hours they
passed by his bier; rich and poor, young and old followed each other in
the long line.

At the funeral services which were held later, many ministers of
different sects and religions combined in the praise of the great and
good man who had passed away in the act of doing his duty.

       *       *       *       *       *

The establishing of Home Rule in Cuba does not seem as near as the
Spaniards would have us believe. An official who understands the ins and
outs of Spanish policy declares that it will be fully a year before the
proposed reforms can be put into working order.

At the present moment there is a general election taking place in Spain,
and until this is settled nothing will be done in regard to Cuban
reforms.

As soon as the elections are over, the Colonial Minister will prepare
the bill which will give Home Rule to Cuba. The bill will then be sent
to the Cortes, where it must be discussed by both the Upper and Lower
Houses before it can become a law. It may take many months before the
members can agree on such an important measure as this will be.

When it has finally passed the Cortes, it must be sent to the Queen, who
will look it over at her leisure, and sign it if she thinks fit.

Even after her signature is affixed the Cortes has the power to lay the
measure aside and prevent its ever becoming a law.

It is therefore hinted in Cuba that the offers of reform may after all
mean nothing but an endeavor to gain time, and prevent the United States
from going to the assistance of Cuba.

The reforms offered are not at all acceptable to Cubans, because they
find that they will be expected to pay the whole of the debt caused by
the war, which now amounts to nearly six hundred million dollars.
Furthermore, the captain-general who will rule over the island as
governor will have the right to veto every act of the legislature. The
Cubans therefore feel that the Home Rule offered is not a genuine reform
which will bring them relief from the abuses from which they rebelled
against Spain, but a sort of game, invented to keep them good tempered,
which is as unlike real Home Rule as playing with a doll is unlike
nursing a real baby.

It is stated that the Cuban people in the field and in the cities do not
believe in the offered Home Rule, and are determined not to accept it.

A proclamation to that effect has come from Cuba. It is signed by
Calixto Garcia, Maximo Gomez, and Domingo Mendez Capote,--which, by the
way, looks as if the report was true that Garcia had been elected
commander-in-chief of the army, Gomez, minister of war, and Capote,
president of Cuba; else why should they sign the proclamation, which is
an official document?

General Gomez has also issued another statement in which he says that
the change in the Spanish Government will not affect the Cuban plans in
the least. The Cubans, he says, are fighting for liberty, and liberty
they will have. They scornfully refuse the Spanish offers of Home Rule,
believing them to be insincere and misleading.

Gomez further declares that the army has been making great preparations
for the coming winter campaign, and expects to show the mother-country,
by force of arms, that Cuba will have nothing from her but freedom.

       *       *       *       *       *

General Weyler has left Cuba, and General Ramon Blanco has taken command
in his place.

The demonstrations so much feared by the Americans and Cubans in Havana
occurred in spite of all the efforts to prevent them, but, happily such
excellent precautions were taken that no rioting ensued.

There were a few cries of "Death to the Americans," but a strong guard
had been placed over our consulate, and so no attack was made on it.

A report was circulated that the American cruiser _Montgomery_ was
outside the harbor, and so the Americans were not interfered with. They
wisely kept within doors during the whole day, and everything passed off
peaceably.

The city itself went wild over its beloved General. The stores were
closed, the streets decorated, rockets were fired, and immense crowds
gathered round the palace to bid Weyler farewell. The General went from
the palace to the wharf on foot, the crowds pressing round him, shaking
his hand, and even kissing him, cheering him to the echo as he embarked.

The Government in Spain sincerely wished to prevent the demonstration.
The ministry desired to give the impression that Weyler had been
recalled from Cuba because his rule had not been satisfactory to Spain.
The Prime Minister therefore feared that if the Spaniards in Cuba
gathered round Weyler and praised his rule--which had been so
bloodthirsty and savage,--the Cubans would be still more enraged against
Spain, and less inclined to believe that she really meant to give them
the promised reforms.

To prevent any show of feeling, word was cabled from Spain that Weyler
was on no account to leave the island until General Blanco arrived.

Weyler must have thought this to mean that Blanco had orders to forbid
any demonstration, and so, in direct defiance to the orders he had
received, he decided to embark the day that Blanco was expected.

By this means he was able to permit the demonstration which was so
pleasing to his vanity, and also to make trouble for his successor.

The Cubans, as Spain feared, were shocked that the Spaniards should make
an idol of their bitterest enemy, and immediately began to doubt the
truth of the Home Rule stories.

Weyler went aboard his ship in great state on Friday afternoon, but by
Saturday the fickle people of Havana were laughing at the man whom they
had praised and embraced the day before.

Weyler had expected that Blanco would arrive an hour or two after his
departure, but, unfortunately, soon after he had embarked he learned
that Blanco's ship could not reach Cuba till Sunday morning, and as the
_Montserrat_, on which Weyler had taken passage, had orders not to leave
Havana till Blanco arrived, the great Weyler was cooped up on board
ship the whole of Saturday, waiting with what patience he might for the
arrival of General Blanco.

At about six o'clock on Sunday morning, October 31st, Blanco reached the
port of Havana. Almost immediately Weyler visited him on board his ship,
turned over his command, and in the afternoon sailed away from the
shores of the beautiful little island which he has laid waste and
ravaged with fire and sword.

Now that he has gone, the Spanish papers are beginning to condemn him
and examine a little more closely into his accounts.

It is possible that trouble may await him when he reaches Spain.

One paper asks that he explain a problem in mathematics which you young
folks should find interesting.

On May 18th, 1897, General Weyler announced that there were only 1,300
insurgents in Cuba, and that these were mostly unarmed.

On September 16th, 1897, he stated that of these (1,300) insurgents
(mostly unarmed), 1,716 had surrendered with arms in their hands, 4,619
had surrendered without arms, 1,007 had been killed in Pinar del Rio,
536 in Havana, 430 in Matanzas, and 966 in Las Villas.

Out of 1,300 insurgents, 6,335 had surrendered and 2,942 had been
killed.

Any one who can make these statements agree will receive a handsome
prize from THE GREAT ROUND WORLD.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is said that one of the first measures to be taken by General Blanco
will be to suppress the barbarous decree made by Weyler which drove the
country people away from their homes, and forced them to herd and starve
in the cities.

These unfortunate people are now to be turned loose again, and given the
right to go back to their homes and their farms.

This seems a very humane thing to do, but it will hardly bring the
Spaniards the popularity they expect.

Since Weyler drove the peasants into the cities their lands and farms
have been laid waste, their houses burned, their cattle stolen. They
will be turned out of the cities penniless and homeless, and exchange
the certainty of dying of hunger in the crowded city for the equal
certainty of dying of hunger in the desolate wasted country.

Added to this, it is uncertain whether General Blanco can induce the
country folks to leave the cities unless he drives them out at the point
of the bayonet.

You probably remember our telling you that when first these people were
forced into the cities, and began to feel the pangs of hunger, they
begged the authorities to give them permission to go back to their
farms, and gather in the crops that were rotting in the fields, that
they might have food to save themselves from starving.

You will also remember that permission was given some of these poor
fellows, and that they started out full of energy and hope, only to be
shot down and killed by the Spanish soldiers as soon as they were
outside the city limits.

The country people have not forgotten this, and it will be hard to make
them believe that this order to leave the city is intended for anything
else than a general massacre. Blanco will find it no easy task to make
the people believe he means well by them.

Immediately on taking charge of affairs, the new Captain-General issued
a proclamation to the people, in which he said that Spain had sent him
to bring peace and prosperity to Cuba, and to extend her forgiveness to
those who were willing to seek the protection of her flag.

He stated that he had been ordered by the Queen to govern the island
with kindness and generosity, but added that the rebellion must be
brought to an end. He declared that while Spain would show mercy to all
who submitted to her rule, she would punish with the utmost severity
those who still remained in arms against her.

      *       *       *       *       *

In the mean while the Cubans are going right ahead. The important town
of Bayamo, in Santiago de Cuba, is being besieged by the insurgents, and
the monthly supply-train from Havana has again been captured by the
rebels.

The condition of the Spanish troops is something pitiable.

The true state of affairs in Cuba is becoming so well known in Spain
that the soldiers there are unwilling to go out to poor pay, poor food,
and a certainty of becoming the prey of some awful pestilence.

Many of the soldiers who have been sent home have died on the voyage,
and those who have reached Spain are so broken down in health that the
fresh soldiers are afraid to go to Cuba.

There have been several mutinies among the troops which were ordered out
with General Blanco.

A mutiny means that the soldiers refuse to obey the orders of their
officers, and is practically a strike among soldiers.

In this instance the men have refused to embark for Cuba. In spite of
their remonstrance they have been forced to obey, and the ringleaders
severely punished.

       *       *       *       *       *

It seems that our chances of being drawn into a war with Spain have not
been greatly lessened by the answer to General Woodford's message.

Every one is waiting anxiously to know what the President will say at
the opening of Congress, for it looks as if the time had come when we
must take sides with Cuba.

The former minister to Spain, Mr. Hannis Taylor, has published an
article in _The North American Review_, in which he gives it as his
opinion that as Spain seems unable to put an end to the war, it is our
duty to interfere, and tell the Spaniards that the war must cease by a
certain date or we will have to take a hand and put an end to it
ourselves.

This article has stirred up a great deal of feeling, and we shall
probably hear more of it.

In the mean while Spain has sent a note to the various powers, asking
what they would be prepared to do if she should declare war on the
United States.

It is said that the European governments have given Spain to understand
that if such an event occurs she will receive nothing stronger than
diplomatic support from them.

       *       *       *       *       *

The cruiser _Montgomery_ and the gunboat _Annapolis_ have been sent in
search of the _Silver Heels_, but have returned to port without finding
any traces of her.

The number of patrol vessels on our coasts has been doubled, and every
possible precaution is being taken to prevent another affair of the
kind; but, in the mean while, the filibuster has got safely away.

Cuban filibustering has, however, received a severe blow from England.

Information was received by the magistrate of Andros Island that the
Cubans had established a depot on one of the Bahamas Islands, of which
Andros is the largest.

These islands lie on the north and east of Cuba, and are a large group
of coral islands, which are formed by those great coral reefs which are
known as the Bahama Banks. Twenty of them are uninhabited, and many of
them are mere reefs or keys.

These islands are very interesting from the fact that they have all been
built by the coral insects. Each of these tiny creatures gathers lime
from the water in which it lives or the food which it eats, and develops
from this a skeleton, which is the coral. They live in masses or
colonies, and throw out buds above them which form fresh coral insects.

These buds immediately set to work and gather lime to build up their
own skeletons. In time the old coral insects below die, leaving behind
them the hard limestone frame which they have built. The younger coral
above lives on, sending forth buds which in turn do their share of the
building, and in time,--in countless ages of time,--reefs and islands
rise out of the mighty depths of the sea, built by the untiring energy
of these marvellous little insects.

This rock building is still going on in the Bahama group, and some
geologists think that in ages to come the coral insects which are at
work on the Bahamas and those that are so busy on the Florida reefs will
build up a vast country where it is now sea, and that ages and ages
hence the Florida Keys, the Bahamas, and perhaps even the West Indian
Islands may be a part of the main land. While this is only a theory, it
should be interesting to you in making you realize that the building of
the world is going on now, from day to day, as steadily as it did in the
days when the bed of the Niagara River was carved out, and the wonders
of the Yellowstone Park were being created by the gradual working of the
waters. The forces of nature are building up and destroying to-day just
as steadily as when the world first began.

But to return to the Bahamas. It was learned that the Cubans had taken
possession of one of these uninhabited islands, and had made it their
headquarters for receiving supplies from the filibustering expeditions.
These supplies they would carry to Cuba when opportunity offered.

No sooner did the English learn this than a gunboat was sent to the
island.

A large supply of arms and ammunition and a number of Cubans were
captured.

The loss will be keenly felt by the Cubans because this depot was also
used as a means of communication with friends in New York, and many of
them escaped to America by this route.

It is not known what will be done with the prisoners taken. At present
they are being held in quarantine for fear of yellow fever.

       *       *       *       *       *

The British in India are advancing into the heart of the Afridis
territory, and are now within thirteen miles of the Afghan frontier.

They have gained another victory over the tribesmen, and have secured
from them two important mountain passes.

The hillsmen are fleeing before the British advance, and representatives
of the Afridi and Orakzai tribes have sought the Ameer of Afghanistan
and asked him to help them.

The Ameer has therefore sent word to the English agent at Kabul that the
tribes are full of repentance and alarm, and have begged him to tell the
British Government for them how truly sorry they are for their
misconduct, and to ask on what terms they can be pardoned.

The Ameer writes on his own account that he is trying to arrest the
Haddah Mullah, the mad priest who stirred up all the trouble, and he
promises that if he can only succeed in finding him, he will exile him
from Afghanistan.

It is not certain that the British are at liberty to make terms with the
Afridis.

With savage and semi-savage people it is always necessary to keep
strictly to your word, else they lose respect, and are apt to think that
their adversaries are not powerful enough to do what they have
threatened to do. The quality of mercy enters very little into their
calculations. To threaten to do a thing, and then not to do it when it
comes to the point, does not mean to them that their adversary is kind
and good, but that he is weak and foolish.

The situation is this:

When Sir William Lockhart took command of the force which was sent out
to punish the Afridis, he issued a proclamation ordering the tribesmen
to submit immediately, stating that he would severely punish any attempt
to oppose the advance of his army.

Now the Afridis have opposed his advance, and opposed it very severely,
and they have not submitted to him.

It is a question whether he will not be obliged to disregard the Ameer's
request for peace, and punish the Afridis, so that they may show more
respect for the British rule in the future.

The complaint of the Government against the Afridis is so serious that
they ought not to be allowed to escape without a severe lesson.

Wishing to live at peace with this tribe, England made an agreement some
time ago with them whereby some of the British forts in the hill country
were put under the care of the Afridis. Money was paid to the tribe, and
arms given out to the men, so that they might be strong enough to
protect the British interests.

In defiance of this agreement the Afridis broke their alliance with the
English, and attacked and destroyed forts which they had agreed to
guard.

The present indications are that the war in India will soon be over.

It is said that this will not put an end to England's troubles in
Hindustan, as the expense of the war, combined with the money spent to
stamp out the plague, has so exhausted the treasury of India that funds
will have to be supplied very soon to keep the country going.

The council of India is considering the best means to raise the money
needed.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Sultan of Turkey has once more been heard from on the subject of
Crete.

This time he is objecting to the commissioner appointed by the Powers to
take charge of Cretan affairs.

It is said that the German Government is in sympathy with the Sultan in
this matter, and has also signified its disapproval of the commissioner.

The uneasy feeling in regard to Turkey is increasing, and trouble is
expected before the winter is over.

       *       *       *       *       *

The news of Andree brought by the whalers turns out to be somewhat
indefinite.

They say that they sighted an object which they are quite sure was the
great balloon.

They state further that they heard strange cries coming across the
ice-fields, which sounded to them like human voices, and they believe
that Andree and his party are stranded somewhere on an ice-floe.

Captain Sverdrup, who commanded the _Fram_, in which Dr. Nansen made his
famous Arctic voyage, says that it is his belief that the sounds heard
were made by birds or else by the packing of the ice.

In the hope that Andree may still be alive, a relief expedition has
started off from the northern coast of Norway in search of the
adventurer and his companions.

There is a very interesting article in this month's _Scribner's
Magazine_, which tells about the starting of the balloon. You should
read it.

       *       *       *       *       *

The fur seal conference has been in session in Washington for nearly two
weeks.

England's representative, of course, was not present. You will remember
that after several refusals and acceptances she finally decided to meet
the United States in a conference to be held separately from the one
which is now taking place.

Russia and Japan are well represented in this conference. Out of
compliment to Mr. Foster, of the United States, who travelled to
England, Russia, and Japan to obtain the consent of these various
countries to the meeting, the attending delegates made him chairman of
the conference.

The result of the discussions so far has been most gratifying to this
country.

The Russian and Japanese commissioners are as fully convinced that the
seal herd is decreasing as the Americans are, and all three countries
have come to an agreement on the matter.

It has been decided to draw up a treaty between the three countries
mentioned, whereby each agrees to prevent her own hunters and those of
other nations from indulging in deep-sea sealing.

As soon as this document is fully prepared the conference will adjourn.

The result of the forthcoming British conference is awaited with
considerable interest.

It is openly stated that there would be no trouble at all with England
if it were not for the interference of Canada and the determination of
the mother country to bow to the wishes of her colony.

It is indeed reported that Lord Salisbury has at last been convinced
that the seals are diminishing.

Last week he sent for several of the leading fur merchants in London,
and asked them to tell him the true state of the case.

According to the accounts that have reached us, one and all of these men
assured him that the reports of Dr. Jordan were strictly correct, and
that beyond any doubt the seals were being killed off.

Even then the Prime Minister doubted, and thinking that the merchants
might be in league with the Americans, he asked suspiciously:

"If this is true, how is it that the price of sealskin is no higher now
than it was when the supply of seals was abundant?"

It was not till he had been convinced that sealskin was no longer the
fashionable fur, and that astrakhan had largely taken its place, that he
was willing to believe them.

It is reported that Sir Wilfrid Laurier, the Premier of Canada, is
coming here to be present at the next conference.

It is to be hoped that Lord Salisbury's eyes may now be opened to the
true state of the case, and that he may be able to convince Sir Wilfrid
that common sense demands that England and Canada shall make a similar
agreement with us to that which is just being prepared with Russia and
Japan.

       *       *       *       *       *

The engineers' strike in England has not yet come to an end.

A special cablegram reports that the situation is unchanged. The Society
of Engineers insists on the eight-hour day, and the masters refuse to
discuss the subject until this point has been abandoned.

The chances of reaching an understanding are more remote than ever.

In the mean while there is trouble in the cotton trade.

The state of the cotton market is such that the manufacturers can no
longer pay the wages they have been paying, and they have had to give
notice to their hands that they must either close their mills or reduce
wages.

At first it was decided that ten per cent. must be taken off the pay of
the workers.

The trades unions discussed the matter with the employers, and refused
to listen to such a reduction of wages.

The masters then declared that they could not continue to pay the
present rate, as they would be losing money. They finally decided to
give their workers a month's notice that they were going to reduce their
wages five per cent.

Every one is anxiously waiting to see what the factory hands will do at
the end of the month.

It is hoped that the time that will intervene before the reduction takes
place will give them an opportunity to think matters over, and so avoid
a strike.

Should the cotton-workers decide to strike, two hundred thousand
operatives may be thrown out of work.

The manufacture of cotton goods in one of the greatest of the English
industries.

Over a million men, women, and children are employed in Great Britain
and Ireland, and nearly five million people are dependent for their
daily bread on the wages earned in the factories.

The centre of this great industry is the city of Manchester. Here the
greatest number of factories are built, and all matters concerning the
cotton market are discussed and settled. Manchester--dirty, smoky
Manchester, with its forest of tall chimneys pouring forth volumes of
black, sulphurous smoke, holds the fate of the cotton trade in its
hands.

It is quite a sight to see the Manchester factory hands rushing out of
the mills, hundreds strong, at the noon hour.

Our own factory hands are, as you well know, neat, tidy, and well
dressed girls. As soon as they turn off from the stream of their
fellow-workers, as they leave the mills, it is hardly possible to tell
whether they are factory girls, shop girls, servants, or young ladies.

The English mill girls are quite different.

They have a distinct dress which points out their occupation wherever
they may be.

To begin with, they never by any chance wear hats. Winter and summer
they go bareheaded.

They one and all wear short skirts which reach to the tops of their
boots; these skirts are always made of cotton goods, and their boots are
thick, clumpy, laced affairs, heavier than those worn by the workmen in
this country--very often they have wooden soles. As you may imagine, the
appearance of these girls' feet is something appalling.

The factory girl's costume is completed by an apron and a small square
shawl of bright plaid, which is worn over the shoulders, or shifted to
cover the head in wet weather.

They are picturesque-looking women, but the majority of them are so big
and brawny and their manners are so rough that you would rather trust
yourself to the mercies of a mad bull than to a crowd of angry factory
girls.

On one occasion in Manchester, the agent of a patent washing-machine,
wishing to advertise his goods, stationed himself outside one of the
mill gates, and offered to wash the girls' greasy, oily aprons as they
came out from work at noon.

Some of the girls took their aprons off, and a large crowd gathered
round the machine to see what was going to be done.

The man put the garments into the machine, turned the crank, and in a
minute the black and dirt were all out of the aprons.

The girls were highly pleased.

They signified their approval as the man wrung out the suds with his
machine, and watched him with great interest as he carefully folded each
apron, and then put them through a couple of rollers which were
attached to the machine and intended to act as a mangle.

Clean, smooth, and neatly pressed, he handed each apron back to its
owner and waited for their thanks. The whole business had not taken more
than five minutes, and he expected to do a thriving trade in
washing-machines on the spot.

He was disappointed.

No sooner did the girls get back their aprons than the trouble began.

In their ignorance they had expected that the garments would be returned
to them dry as well as clean, and when they found that they were
wringing wet and could not be used again for several hours, their rage
knew no bounds.

They beat the man, tore his clothes, broke his machine, and ill-treated
him until the men and boys from the mill, who had been watching the riot
with laughter, thought it was time to interfere, and rescued the agent
from the angry women.

There is nothing gentle or feminine about the English factory girl.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Sultan of Turkey has sent a demand to the powers that the ten
thousand rifles seized on board a Greek ship shall be turned over to
him. These arms were taken during the early part of the blockade of
Crete, and have been held by the powers.

Abdul Hamid has also issued a protest against the trial of a number of
his subjects in the courts of Crete. He demands that they shall be sent
over to Turkish courts and tried by Turkish judges instead of by the
representatives of the powers.

He seems to be beginning his interference in Cretan matters.

       *       *       *       *       *

A telegram from Christiania, Norway, states that news of Professor
Andree has just been brought from Spitzbergen.

The nature of the news is not given, but it has been brought by the crew
of a ship which was wrecked in the Arctic Seas, and who have just made
their way to Spitzbergen.

Spitzbergen is one of a group of islands in the Arctic Ocean to the
north of Sweden, and east of Greenland.

We may probably soon learn the fate of Andree and his brave followers.

                                                  G.H. ROSENFELD.




PRIZE CONTEST.


There were so many competitors in the prize contest recently closed that
it was impossible to decide who were the winners in time to announce
their names in last week's paper. The quotation was, "The Pen is
Mightier than the Sword," and Miss H.K. Peck, Crown Street, Meriden,
Conn., won the first prize, and Miss E. DuBois, Greenwich, Conn., the
second.

Watch for the new contest, which will begin in an early number.




LETTERS FROM OUR YOUNG FRIENDS.


     DEAR MR. HARISON:

     I have taken great interest in THE GREAT ROUND WORLD. When I
     was away this summer I showed your paper to a great many
     people, and they thought it was very nice, and they thought
     they would subscribe for it.

     I have taken great interest in the Klondike affair. I went
     away this summer to Lake Hopatcong and had a lovely time,
     but we came home a little while ago.

     Hoping your paper the most possible success,

                                          Yours truly,
     SOUTH ORANGE, N.J.                      B.F.



DEAR LITTLE FRIEND:

We are very pleased to receive your kind letter.


                                               EDITOR.


     TO THE EDITOR:

     I wish to call your attention to the article printed in last
     week's GREAT ROUND WORLD about Austria. Your description
     about the Bohemians, properly called Czechs, is wrong. They
     are not wild, unruly, nor obstinate. In the United States
     there are five hundred thousand Czechs, and you never hear
     of them giving trouble to the Government nor any one else.
     Everywhere they are known as a quiet, industrious race,
     doing their business and offending no one. In Europe they
     have a great many obstacles to overcome. One of them is that
     the Germans are trying to crush them wherever they can.
     Every nation loves its tongue and wishes it to live, so do
     the Czechs. Because they oppose, are they to be called wild,
     obstinate, and ill-governed? The Czechs' language is not so
     difficult. I know Americans speaking the Czechs' language
     as well as Czechs themselves. I do not wish to discuss their
     rights, but I do feel that where a sad mistake has been made
     it ought to be rectified. Young readers must be informed
     correctly; and knowing it to be your aim to inform your
     readers so, I take the liberty of writing. I hope you will
     not think me prejudiced, nor that I merely write from a
     Czech's standpoint. An injustice has been done and ought to
     be righted if possible. If you wish to gain correct
     information, I refer you to Mr. Riis, author of "How the
     Other Half Lives." Also to Dr. Hall, minister of the
     Presbyterian Church. They have both been to Austria several
     times, and know a great deal about the Czechs. Hoping you
     will consider the matter, I remain yours,      A.B. BAZATA.

     NEW YORK CITY, October 18th, 1897.


DEAR FRIEND:

We were very pleased to receive your letter.

You have evidently misunderstood the article in question, and also
misquoted it.

If you will look back at page 1,390 you will see that we do not say the
Bohemians are an unruly people, but that they are wild and quickly
irritated--information which you can easily verify for yourself. We had
no intention of making any disparaging remarks about the race. We merely
stated facts which are so well known in Europe that they have become
proverbs.

In reference to the Czech language we must also differ with you. Your
argument that you have friends who speak the language does not strike us
as very sound. There are numbers of Europeans who have learned Chinese,
but that does not alter the fact that Chinese is an abnormally difficult
tongue.

If you will read our article through again you will see that your zeal
for the Bohemians has made you defend them before they were accused.

We stated that the governing of Austria is a very difficult task in
consequence of the three conflicting elements of which it is composed,
and explained the nature and grievance of each element.

You must not let your sympathies cloud your judgment.

                                                       EDITOR.




INVENTION AND DISCOVERY.


By means of slot-boxes one may buy gum or postage-stamps, be weighed, or
have his picture taken.

A schoolboy of St. Louis has recently invented a new and practical form
of this popular machine.

The Martin paper slot-box is to be used upon street cars and railway
trains for the sale of daily papers.

It has separate compartments for each morning daily, with movable
name-slips so that the one box may serve for the sale of both morning
and evening papers.

Though small and neat, the box will hold forty-five papers.

By inserting a penny and pushing a button, any paper desired may be had.
The boxes are so arranged that five cents will be necessary to work the
button for Sunday papers.

The patent papers have been received, and the youthful inventor is
superintending the making of the boxes. As soon as a sufficient number
are ready they are to be given a thorough trial on the leading lines of
cars in St. Louis.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is
Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 54, November 18, 1897, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD ***

***** This file should be named 16177.txt or 16177.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/6/1/7/16177/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.(www.pgdp.net)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
