The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Dore Gallery of Bible Illustrations,
Volume 2, by Anonymous, Illustrated by Gustave Dore

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Dore Gallery of Bible Illustrations, Volume 2
       Illustrated by Gustave Dore

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: July 28, 2004 [EBook #8702]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DORE BIBLE GALLERY, VOL. 2 ***




Produced by David Widger





              THE DORE GALLERY OF BIBLE ILLUSTRATIONS

                  Illustrated by Gustave Dore

                          Volume 2.




THE TRIAL OF THE FAITH OF ABRAHAM.


And it came to pass after these things, that God did tempt Abraham, and
said unto him, Abraham: and he said, Behold, here I am. And he said, Take
now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest, and get thee into
the land of Moriah; and offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of
the mountains which I will tell thee of.

And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and saddled his ass, and took
two of his young men with him, and Isaac his son, and clave the wood for
the burnt offering, and rose up and went unto the place of which God had
told him. Then on the third day Abraham lifted up his eyes and saw the
place afar off. And Abraham said unto his young men, Abide ye here with
the ass; and I and the lad will go yonder and worship, and come again to
you. And Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering and laid it upon
Isaac his son; and he took the fire in his hand and a knife, and they
went both of them together. And Isaac spake unto Abraham his father, and
said, My father: and he, said, Here am I, my son. And he said, Behold the
fire and the wood: but where is the lamb for a burnt offering? And
Abraham said, My son, God will provide himself a lamb for a burnt
offering: so they went both of them together. And they came to the place
which God had told him of; and Abraham built an altar there, and laid the
wood in order, and bound Isaac his son, and laid him on the altar upon
the wood. And Abraham stretched forth his hand and took the knife to slay
his son. And the angel of the Lord called unto him out of heaven, and
said, Abraham, Abraham: and he said, Here am I. And he said, Lay not
thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou anything unto him: for now I
know that thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not withheld thy son, thine
only son, from me. And Abraham lifted up his eyes and looked, and behold
behind him a ram caught in a thicket by his horns: and Abraham went and
took the ram, and offered him up for a burnt offering in the stead of his
son.

And Abraham called the name of that place Jehovah-jireh: as it is to this
day, In the mount of the Lord it shall be seen.

And the angel of the Lord called unto Abraham out of heaven the second
time, and said, By myself have I sworn, saith the Lord, for because thou
hast done this thing, and hast not withheld thy son, thine only son, that
in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy
seed as the stars of heaven, and as the sand which is upon the sea shore;
and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies; and in thy seed shall
all the nations of the earth be blessed, because thou hast obeyed my
voice.--Geneszs xxii. 1-18.




THE BURIAL OF SARAH.


And Sarah was an hundred and seven and twenty years old these were the
years of the life of Sarah. And Sarah died in Kirjath-arba; the same is
Hebron in the land of Canaan and Abraham came to mourn for Sarah, and to
weep for her.

And Abraham stood up from before his dead, and spake unto the sons of
Heth, saying, I am a stranger and a sojourner with you: give me a
possession of a burying-place with you, that I may bury my dead out of my
sight.

And the children of Heth answered Abraham, saying unto him, Hear us, my
lord: thou art a mighty prince among us: in the choice of our sepulchres
bury thy dead; none of us shall withhold from thee his sepulchre, but
that thou mayest bury thy dead.

And Abraham stood up, and bowed himself to the people of the land, even
to the children of Heth. And he communed with them, saying, If it be your
mind that I should bury my dead out of my sight; hear me, and intreat for
me to Ephron the son of Zohar, that he may give me the cave of Machpelah,
which he hath, which is in the end of his field; for as much money as it
is worth he shall give it me for a possession of a burying-place amongst
you.

And Ephron dwelt among the children of Heth: and Ephron the Hittite
answered Abraham in the audience of the children of Heth, even of all
that went in at the gate of his city, saying, Nay, my lord, hear me: the
field give I thee, and the cave that is therein, I give it thee; in the
presence of the sons of my people give I it thee: bury thy dead.

And Abraham bowed down himself before the people of the land. And he
spake unto Ephron in the audience of the people of the land, saying, But
if thou wilt give it, I pray thee, hear me: I will give thee money for
the field; take it of me, and I will bury my dead there.

And Ephron answered Abraham, saying unto him, My lord, hearken unto me:
the land is worth four hundred shekels of silver: what is that betwixt me
and thee? bury therefore thy dead.

And Abraham hearkened unto Ephron; and Abraham weighed to Ephron the
silver, which he had named in the audience of the sons of Heth, four
hundred shekels of silver, current money with the merchant.

And the field of Ephron, which was in Machpelah, which was before Mamre,
the field, and the cave which was therein, and all the trees that were in
the field, that were in all the borders round about, were made sure unto
Abraham for a possession in the presence of the children of Heth, before
all that went in at the gate of his city.

And after this, Abraham buried Sarah his wife in the cave of the field of
Machpelah before Mamre; the same is Hebron in the land of Canaan. And the
field, and the cave that is therein, were made sure unto Abraham for a
possession of a burying-place by the sons of Heth.--Genesis xxiii.




ELIEZER AND REBEKAH.


And the servant put his hand under the thigh of Abraham his master, and
sware to him concerning that matter.

And the servant took ten camels of the camels of his master, and
departed; for all the goods of his master were in his hand: and he arose
and went to Mesopotamia, unto the city of Nahor. And he made his camels
to kneel down, without the city by a well of water at the time of the
evening, even the time that women go out to draw water. And he said, O
Lord God of my master Abraham, I pray thee, send me good speed this day,
and shew kindness unto my master Abraham. Behold, I stand here by the
well of water; and the daughters of the men of the city come out to draw:
water: and let it come to pass, that the damsel to whom I shall say, Let
down thy pitcher, I pray thee, that I may drink; and she shall say,
Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also: let the same be she that
thou hast appointed for thy servant Isaac; and thereby shall I know that
thou hast shewed kindness unto my master.

And it came to pass before he had done speaking, that, behold, Rebekah
came out, who was born to Bethuel, son of Milcah, the wife of Nahor,
Abraham's brother, with her pitcher upon her shoulder. And the damsel was
very fair to look upon, a virgin, neither had any man known her: and she
went down to the well, and filled her pitcher and came up. And the
servant ran to meet her, and said, Let me, I pray thee, drink a little
water of thy pitcher. And she said, Drink, my lord; and she hasted, and
let down her pitcher upon her hand, and gave him drink. And when she had
done giving him drink, she said, I will draw water for thy camels also,
until they have done drinking. And she hasted and emptied her pitcher
into the trough, and ran again unto the well to draw water, and drew for
all his camels.

And the man wondering at her held his peace, to wit whether the Lord had
made his journey prosperous or not.

And it came to pass, as the camels had done drinking, that the man took a
golden earring of half a shekel weight, and two bracelets for her hands
of ten shekels weight of gold: and said, Whose daughter art thou? tell
me, I pray thee; is there room in thy father's house for us to lodge in?
And she said unto him, I am the daughter of Bethuel the son of Milcah,
which she bare unto Nahor. She said moreover unto him, We have both straw
and provender enough, and room to lodge in.

And the man bowed down his head and worshiped the Lord. And he said,
Blessed be the Lord God of my master Abraham, who hath not left destitute
my master of his mercy and his truth: I being in the way, the Lord led me
to the house of my master's brethren.

And the damsel ran, and told them of her mother's house these
things.--Genesis xxiv, 9-28.




ISAAC BLESSING JACOB.


And it came to pass, that when Isaac was old, and his eyes were dim, so
that he could not see, he called Esau, his eldest son, and said unto him,
My son: and he said unto him, Behold, here am I. And he said, Behold now,
I am old, I know not the day of my death: Now therefore take, I pray
thee, thy weapons, thy quiver and thy bow, and go out to the field, and
take me some venison; And make me savoury meat, such as I love, and bring
it to me, that I may eat; that my soul may bless thee before I die.

And Rebekah heard when Isaac spake to Esau his son. And Esau went to the
field to hunt for venison, and to bring it.

And Rebekah spake unto Jacob her son, saying, Behold, I heard thy father
speak unto Esau thy brother, saying, Bring me venison, and make me
savoury meat, that I may eat, and bless thee before the Lord before my
death. Now therefore, my son, obey my voice according to that which I
command thee. Go now to the flock, and fetch me from thence two good kids
of the goats; and I will make them savoury meat for thy father such as he
loveth; And thou shalt bring it to thy father, that he may eat, and that
he may bless thee before his death.

And Jacob said to Rebekah his mother, Behold, Esau my brother is a hairy
man, and I am a smooth man: My father peradventure will feel me, and I
shall seem to him as a deceiver; and I shall bring a curse upon me, and
not a blessing.

And his mother said unto him, Upon me be thy curse, my son: only obey my
voice, and go fetch me them.

And he went, and fetched, and brought them to his mother: and his mother
made savoury meat, such as his father loved. And Rebekah took goodly
raiment of her eldest son Esau, which were with her in the house, and put
them upon Jacob her younger son: And she put the skins of the kids of the
goats upon his hands and upon the smooth of his neck: And she gave the
savoury meat and the bread, which she had prepared, into the hand of her
son Jacob.

And he came unto his father, and said, My father: and he said, Here am I;
who art thou, my son? And Jacob said unto his father, I am Esau thy first
born; I have done according as thou badest me: arise, I pray thee, sit
and eat of my venison, that thy soul may bless me. And Isaac said unto
his son, How is it that thou hast found it so quickly, my son? And he
said, Because the Lord thy God brought it to me. And Isaac said unto
Jacob, Come near, I pray thee, that I may feel thee, my son, whether thou
be my very son Esau or not. And Jacob went; near unto Isaac his father;
and he felt him, and said, The voice is Jacob's voice, but the hands are
the hands of Esau. And he discerned him not, because his hands were
hairy, as his brother Esau's hands: so he blessed him.

And he said, Art thou my very son Esau? And he said, I am. And he said,
Bring it near to me, and I will eat of my son's venison, that my soul may
bless thee. And he brought it near to him, and he did eat; and he brought
him wine, and he drank. And his father Isaac said unto him, Come near
now, and kiss me, my son. And he came near, and kissed him: and he
smelled the smell of his raiment, and blessed him, and said, See, the
smell of my son is as the smell of a field which the Lord hath blessed:
Therefore God give thee of the dew of heaven, and the fatness of the
earth, and plenty of corn and wine: Let people serve thee, and nations
bow down to thee: be lord over thy brethren, and let thy mother's sons
bow down to thee: cursed be every one that curseth thee, and blessed be
he that blesseth thee.--Genesis xxvii. 1-29.




JACOB TENDING THE FLOCKS OF LABAN.


And while he yet spake with them, Rachel came with her father's sheep:
for she kept them. And it came to pass, when Jacob saw Rachel the
daughter of Laban his mother's brother, and the sheep of Laban his
mother's brother, that Jacob went near, and rolled the stone from the
well's mouth, and watered the flock of Laban his mother's brother. And
Jacob kissed Rachel, and lifted up his voice, and wept. And Jacob told
Rachel that he was her father's brother, and that he was Rebekah's son:
and she ran and told her father.

And it came to pass, when Laban heard the tidings of Jacob his sister's
son, that he ran to meet him, and embraced him, and kissed him, and
brought him to his house. And he told Laban all these things. And Laban
said to him, Surely thou art my bone and my flesh. And he abode with him
the space of a month. And Laban said unto Jacob, Because thou art my
brother, shouldest thou therefore serve me for naught? tell me, what
shall thy wages be?

And Laban had two daughters: the name of the elder was Leah, and the name
of the younger was Rachel. Leah was tender eyed; but Rachel was beautiful
and well favoured.

And Jacob loved Rachel; and said, I will serve thee seven years for
Rachel thy younger daughter. And Laban said, It is better that I give her
to thee, than that I should give her to another man; abide with me.

And Jacob served seven years for Rachel; and they seemed unto him but a
few days, for the love he had for her. And Jacob said unto Laban, Give me
my wife, for my days are fulfilled, that I may go in unto her.

And Laban gathered together all the men of the place, and made a feast.
And it came to pass in the evening, that he took Leah his daughter, and
brought her to him; and he went in unto her. And Laban gave unto his
daughter Leah Zilpah his maid, for an handmaid. And it came to pass that
in the morning, behold, it was Leah: and he said to Laban, What is this
thou hast done unto me? did not I serve with thee for Rachel? wherefore
then hast thou beguiled me? And Laban said, It must not be so done in our
country, to give the younger before the firstborn. Fulfil her week, and
we will give thee this also for the service which thou shalt serve with
me yet seven other years.

And Jacob did so, and fulfilled her week; and he gave him Rachel his
daughter to wife also. And Laban gave to Rachel his daughter Bilhah his
handmaid to be her maid. And he went in also unto Rachel, and he loved
also Rachel more than Leah, and served with him yet seven other
years.--Genesis xxix, 9-30.




JOSEPH SOLD INTO EGYPT.


These are the generations of Jacob. Joseph, being seventeen years old,
was feeding the flock with his brethren, and the lad was with the sons of
Bilhah and with the sons of Zilpah, his father's wives; and Joseph
brought unto his father their evil report. Now Israel loved Joseph more
than all his children, because he was the son of his old age; and he made
him a coat of many colors. And when his brethren saw that their father
loved him more than all his brethren, they hated him, and could not speak
peaceably unto him.

And Joseph dreamed a dream, and he told it his brethren: and they hated
him yet the more. And he said unto them, Hear, I pray you, this dream
which I have dreamed. For, behold, we were binding sheaves in the field,
and, lo, my sheaf arose, and also stood upright; and, behold, your
sheaves stood round about, and made obeisance to my sheaf. And his
brethren said to him, Shalt thou indeed reign over us? or shalt thou
indeed have dominion over us? And they hated him yet the more for his
dreams and for his words.

And he dreamed yet another dream, and told it his brethren, and said,
Behold, I have dreamed a dream more; and, behold, the sun and the moon
and the eleven stars made obeisance to me. And he told it to his father
and to his brethren; and his father rebuked him, and said unto him, What
is this dream that thou hast dreamed? Shall I and thy mother and thy
brethren indeed come to bow down ourselves to thee to the earth. And his
brethren envied him; but his father observed the saying.

And his brethren went to feed their father's flock in Shechem.

And Joseph went after his brethren, and found them in Dothan. And when
they saw him afar off, even before he came near unto them, they conspired
against him to slay him. And they said one to another, Behold, this
dreamer cometh. Come now, therefore, and let us slay him, and cast him
into some pit, and we will say, Some evil beast hath devoured him; and we
shall see what will become of his dreams. And Reuben heard it, and he
delivered him out of their hands; and said, Let us not kill him. And
Reuben said unto them, Shed no blood, but cast him into this pit that is
in the wilderness, and lay no hand upon him; that he might rid him out of
their hands to deliver him to his father again.

And it came to pass, when Joseph was come unto his brethren, that they
stript Joseph out of his coat, his coat of many colors that was on him;
and they took him and cast him into a pit; and the pit was empty, there
was no water in it. And they sat down to eat bread; and they lifted up
their eyes and looked, and, behold, a company of Ishmaelites came from
Gilead with their camels bearing spicery and balm and myrrh, going to
carry it down to Egypt. And Judah said unto his brethren, What profit is
it if we slay our brother, and conceal his blood? Come, and let us sell
him to the Ishmaelites, and let not our hand be upon him, for he is our
brother and our flesh. And his brethren were content.

Then there passed by Midianites merchantmen; and they drew and lifted up
Joseph out of the pit, and sold Joseph to the Ishmaelites for twenty
pieces of silver; and they brought Joseph into Egypt.

And the Midianites sold him into Egypt unto Potiphar, an officer of
Pharaoh's, and captain of the guard.--Genesis xxxvii, 2--12, 17-28, 36




JOSEPH INTERPRETING PHARAOH'S DREAM.


And it came to pass at the end of two full years, that Pharaoh dreamed:
and, behold, he stood by the river. And, behold, there came up out of the
river seven well favoured kine and fat-fleshed; and they fed in a meadow.
And, behold, seven other kine came up after them out of the river, ill
favoured and lean-fleshed; and stood by the other kine upon the brink of
the river. And the ill favored and lean-fleshed kine did eat up the seven
well favoured and fat kine. So Pharaoh awoke.

And he slept and dreamed the second time: and, behold, seven ears of corn
came up upon one stalk, rank and good. And, behold, seven thin ears and
blasted with the east wind sprung up after them. And the seven thin ears
devoured the seven rank and full ears. And Pharaoh awoke, and, behold, it
was a dream.

And it came to pass in the morning that his spirit was troubled; and he
sent and called for all the magicians of Egypt, and all the wise men
thereof: and Pharaoh told them his dream; but there was none that could
interpret them unto Pharaoh.

[At the suggestion of his chief butler Pharaoh sends for Joseph and
relates to him his dreams, which Joseph interprets as follows:]

And Joseph said unto Pharaoh, The dream of Pharaoh is one: God hath
shewed Pharaoh what he is about to do. The seven good kine are seven
years; and the seven good ears are seven years: the dream is one. And the
seven thin and ill favoured kine that came up after them are seven years;
and the seven empty ears blasted with the east wind shall be seven years
of famine. This is the thing which I have spoken unto Pharaoh: What God
is about to do he sheweth unto Pharaoh. Behold, there come seven years of
great plenty throughout all the land of Egypt: And there shall arise
after them seven years of famine; and all the plenty shall be forgotten
in the land of Egypt; and the famine shall consume the land; and the
plenty shall not be known in the land by reason of that famine following;
for it shall be very grievous. And for that the dream was doubled unto
Pharaoh twice it is because the thing is established by God, and God will
shortly bring it to pass.

Now therefore let Pharaoh look out a man discreet and wise, and set him
over the land of Egypt. Let Pharaoh do this, and let him appoint officers
over the land, and take up the fifth part of the land of Egypt in the
seven plenteous years. And let them gather all the food of those good
years that come, and lay up corn under the hand of Pharaoh, and let them
keep food in the cities. And that food shall be for store to the land
against the seven years of famine, which shall be in the land of Egypt;
that the land perish not through the famine.--Genesis xli. 1-36.




JOSEPH MAKING HIMSELF KNOWN TO HIS BRETHREN.


Then Joseph could not refrain himself before all them that stood by him;
and he cried, Cause every man to go out from me. And there stood no man
with him, while Joseph made himself known unto his brethren. And he wept
aloud: and the Egyptians and the house of Pharaoh heard.

And Joseph said unto his brethren, I am Joseph; doth my father yet live?
And his brethren could not answer him; for they were troubled at his
presence. And Joseph said unto his brethren, Come near to me, I pray you.
And they came near. And he said, I am Joseph your brother, whom ye sold
into Egypt. Now therefore be not grieved, nor angry with yourselves, that
ye sold me hither: for God did send me before you to preserve life. For
these two years hath the famine been in the land: and yet there are five
years, in which there shall neither be earing nor harvest. And God sent
me before you to preserve you a posterity in the earth, and to save your
lives by a great deliverance. So now it was not you that sent me hither,
but God: and he hath made me a father to Pharaoh, and lord of all his
house, and a ruler throughout all the land of Egypt. Haste ye, and go up
to my father, and say unto him, Thus saith thy son Joseph, God hath made
me lord of all Egypt: come down unto me, tarry not: And thou shalt dwell
in the land of Goshen, and thou shalt be near unto me, thou, and thy
children, and thy children's children, and thy flocks, and thy herds, and
all that thou hast. And there will I nourish thee; for yet there are five
years of famine; lest thou, and thy household, and all that thou hast,
come to poverty. And, behold, your eyes see, and the eyes of my brother
Benjamin, that it is my mouth that speaketh unto you. And ye shall tell
my father of all my glory in Egypt, and of all that ye have seen; and ye
shall haste and bring down my father hither.

And he fell upon his brother Benjamin's neck, and wept; and Benjamin wept
upon his neck. Moreover he kissed all his brethren, and wept upon them:
and after that his brethren talked with him.

And the fame thereof was heard in Pharaoh's house, saying, Joseph's
brethren are come and it pleased Pharaoh well, and his servants.

And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, say unto thy brethren, This do ye; lade
your beasts, and go, get you unto the land of Canaan; and take your
father and your households, and come unto me: and I will give you the
good of the land of Egypt, and ye shall eat the fat of the land.--Genesis
xlv, 1-18.




MOSES IN THE BULRUSHES.


And there went a man of the house of Levi, and took to wife a daughter of
Levi. And the woman conceived, and bare a son: and when she saw him that
he was a goodly child, she hid him three months. And when she could not
longer hide him, she took for him an ark of bulrushes, and daubed it with
slime and with pitch, and put the child therein; and she laid it in the
flags by the river's brink. And his sister stood afar off, to wit what
would be done to him.

And the daughter of Pharaoh came down to wash herself at the river; and
her maidens walked along by the river's side; and when she saw the ark
among the flags, she sent her maid to fetch it. And when she had opened
it, she saw the child: and, behold, the babe wept. And she had compassion
on him, and said, This is one of the Hebrews' children. Then said his
sister to Pharaoh's daughter, Shall I go and call to thee a nurse of the
Hebrew women, that she may nurse the child for thee? And Pharaoh's
daughter said to her, Go. And the maid went and called the child's
mother. And Pharaoh's daughter said unto her, Take this child away, and
nurse it for me, and I will give thee thy wages. And the woman took the
child and nursed it.

And the child grew, and she brought him unto Pharaoh's daughter, and he
became her son. And she called his name Moses: and she said, Because I
drew him out of the water.--Exodus ii, 1-10.




THE WAR AGAINST GIBEON.


Therefore the five kings of the Amorites, the king of Jerusalem, the king
of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, the king of Eglon,
gathered themselves together, and went up, they and all their hosts, and
encamped before Gibeon, and made war against it.

And the men of Gibeon sent unto Joshua to the camp to Gilgal, saying,
Slack not thy hand from thy servants; come up to us quickly, and save us
and help us: for all the kings of the Amorites that dwell in the
mountains are gathered together against us.

So Joshua ascended from Gilgal, he, and all the people of war with him,
and all the mighty men of valor. And the Lord said unto Joshua, Fear them
not: for I have delivered them into thine hand; there shall not a man of
them stand before thee. Joshua therefore came unto them suddenly, and
went up from Gilgal all night. And the Lord discomfited them before
Israel, and slew them with a great slaughter at Gibeon, and chased them
along the way that goeth up to Beth-horon, and smote them to Azekah, and
unto Makkedah. And it came to pass, as they fled from before Israel, and
were in the going down to Beth-horon, that the Lord cast down great
stones from heaven upon them unto Azekah, and they died: they were more
which died with hailstones than they whom the children of Israel slew
with the sword.

Then spake Joshua to the Lord in the day when the Lord delivered up the
Amorites before the children of Israel, and he said in the sight of
Israel, Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon; and thou, Moon, in the valley
of Ajalon. And the sun stood still, and the moon stayed, until the people
had avenged themselves upon their enemies. Is not this written in the
book of Jasher? So the sun stood still in the midst of heaven, and
hastened not to go down about a whole day. And there was no day like that
before it or after it, that the Lord hearkened unto the voice of a man:
for the Lord fought for Israel.

And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, unto the camp to Gilgal.
But these five kings fled, and hid themselves in a cave at Makkedah. And
it was told Joshua, saying, The five kings are found hid in a cave at
Makkedah. And Joshua said, Roll great stones upon the mouth of the cave,
and set men by it for to keep them: and stay ye not, but pursue after
your enemies, and smite the hindmost of them; suffer them not to enter
into their cities; for the Lord your God hath delivered them into your
hand.

And it came to pass, when Joshua and the children of Israel had made an
end of slaying them with a very great slaughter, till they were consumed,
that the rest which remained of them entered into fenced cities. Joshua
x, 5-20.




SISERA SLAIN BY JAEL.


Now Heber the Kenite, which was of the children of Hobab, the
father-in-law of Moses, had severed himself from the Kenites, and pitched
his tent unto the plain of Zaanaim, which is by Kedesh.

And they shewed Sisera that Barak, the son of Abinoam, was gone up to
Mount Tabor. And Sisera gathered together all his chariots, even nine
hundred chariots of iron, and all the people that were with him, from
Harosheth of the Gentiles unto the river of Kishon.

And Deborah said unto Barak, Up; for this is the day in which the Lord
hath delivered Sisera into thine hand: is not the Lord gone out before
thee? So Barak went down from Mount Tabor, and ten thousand men after
him.

And the Lord discomfited Sisera, and all his chariots and all his host,
with the edge of the sword before Barak; so that Sisera lighted down off
his chariot, and fled away on his feet. But Barak pursued after the
chariots, and after the host, unto Harosheth of the Gentiles: and all the
host of Sisera fell upon the edge of the sword; and there was not a man
left.

Howbeit Sisera fled away on his feet to the tent of Jael, the wife of
Heber the Kenite; for there was peace between Jabin the king of Hazor and
the house of Heber the Kenite. And Jael went out to meet Sisera, and said
unto him, Turn in, my lord, turn in to me; fear not. And when he had
turned in unto her into the tent, she covered him with a mantle. And he
said unto her, Give me, I pray thee, a little water to drink; for I am
thirsty. And she opened a bottle of milk, and gave him drink, and covered
him. Again he said unto her, Stand in the door of the tent, and it shall
be, when any man doth come and enquire of thee, and say, Is there any man
here? that thou shalt say, No. Then Jael, Heber's wife, took a nail of
the tent, and took an hammer in her hand, and went softly unto him, and
smote the nail into his temples, and fastened it into the ground: for he
was fast asleep and weary. So he died.

And, behold, as Barak pursued Sisera, Jael came out to meet him, and said
unto him, Come, and I will show thee the man whom thou seekest. And when
he came into her tent, behold, Sisera lay dead, and the nail was in his
temples. Judges iv, 2-22.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Dore Gallery of Bible
Illustrations, Volume 2, by Anonymous, Illustrated by Gustave Dore

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DORE BIBLE GALLERY, VOL. 2 ***

***** This file should be named 8702.txt or 8702.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/8/7/0/8702/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
