Project Gutenberg's Diary of Samuel Pepys, December 1664, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, December 1664

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: November 30, 2004 [EBook #4152]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                DECEMBER
                                  1664

December 1st.  Up betimes and to White Hall to a Committee of Tangier, and
so straight home and hard to my business at my office till noon, then to
dinner, and so to my office, and by and by we sat all the afternoon, then
to my office again till past one in the morning, and so home to supper and
to bed.

2nd.  Lay long in bed.  Then up and to the office, where busy all the
morning.  At home dined.  After dinner with my wife and Mercer to the
Duke's House, and there saw "The Rivalls," which I had seen before; but
the play not good, nor anything but the good actings of Betterton and his
wife and Harris.  Thence homeward, and the coach broke with us in
Lincoln's Inn Fields, and so walked to Fleete Streete, and there took
coach and home, and to my office, whither by and by comes Captain Cocke,
and then Sir W. Batten, and we all to Sir J. Minnes, and I did give them a
barrel of oysters I had given to me, and so there sat and talked, where
good discourse of the late troubles, they knowing things, all of them,
very well; and Cocke, from the King's own mouth, being then entrusted
himself much, do know particularly that the King's credulity to Cromwell's
promises, private to him, against the advice of his friends and the
certain discovery of the practices and discourses of Cromwell in council
(by Major Huntington)

     [According to Clarendon the officer here alluded to was a major in
     Cromwell's own regiment of horse, and employed by him to treat with
     Charles I. whilst at Hampton Court; but being convinced of the
     insincerity of the proceeding, communicated his suspicions to that
     monarch, and immediately gave up his commission.  We hear no more of
     Huntington till the Restoration, when his name occurs with those of
     many other officers, who tendered their services to the king.  His
     reasons for laying down his commission are printed in Thurloe's
     "State Papers" and Maseres's "Tracts."--B.]

did take away his life and nothing else.  Then to some loose atheisticall
discourse of Cocke's, when he was almost drunk, and then about 11 o'clock
broke up, and I to my office, to fit up an account for Povy, wherein I
hope to get something.  At it till almost two o'clock, then to supper and
to bed.

3rd.  Up, and at the office all the morning, and at noon to Mr. Cutler's,
and there dined with Sir W. Rider and him, and thence Sir W. Rider and I
by coach to White Hall to a Committee of the Fishery; there only to hear
Sir Edward Ford's proposal about farthings, wherein, O God! to see almost
every body interested for him; only my Lord Annesly, who is a grave,
serious man.  My Lord Barkeley was there, but is the most hot, fiery man
in discourse, without any cause, that ever I saw, even to breach of
civility to my Lord Anglesey, in his discourse opposing to my Lord's.  At
last, though without much satisfaction to me, it was voted that it should
be requested of the King, and that Sir Edward Ford's proposal is the best
yet made.  Thence by coach home.  The Duke of Yorke being expected
to-night with great joy from Portsmouth, after his having been abroad at
sea three or four days with the fleete; and the Dutch are all drawn into
their harbours.  But it seems like a victory: and a matter of some
reputation to us it is, and blemish to them; but in no degree like what it
is esteemed at, the weather requiring them to do so.  Home and at my
office late, and then to supper and to bed.

4th (Lord's day).  Lay long in bed, and then up and to my office, there to
dispatch a business in order to the getting something out of the Tangier
business, wherein I have an opportunity to get myself paid upon the score
of freight.  I hope a good sum.  At noon home to dinner, and then in the
afternoon to church.  So home, and by and by comes Mr. Hill and Andrews,
and sung together long and with great content.  Then to supper and broke
up.  Pretty discourse, very pleasant and ingenious, and so to my office a
little, and then home (after prayers) to bed.  This day I hear the Duke of
Yorke is come to towne, though expected last night, as I observed, but by
what hindrance stopped I can't tell.

5th.  Up, and to White Hall with Sir J. Minnes; and there, among an
infinite crowd of great persons, did kiss the Duke's hand; but had no time
to discourse.  Thence up and down the gallery, and got my Lord of
Albemarle's hand to my bill for Povy, but afterwards was asked some scurvy
questions by Povy about my demands, which troubled [me], but will do no
great hurt I think.  Thence vexed home, and there by appointment comes my
cozen Roger Pepys and Mrs. Turner, and dined with me, and very merry we
were.  They staid all the afternoon till night, and then after I had
discoursed an hour with Sir W. Warren plainly declaring my resolution to
desert him if he goes on to join with Castle, who and his family I, for
great provocation, love not, which he takes with some trouble, but will
concur in everything with me, he says.  Now I am loth, I confess, to lose
him, he having been the best friend I have had ever in this office. So he
being gone, we all, it being night, in Madam Turner's coach to her house,
there to see, as she tells us, how fat Mrs. The.  is grown, and so I find
her, but not as I expected, but mightily pleased I am to hear the mother
commend her daughter Betty that she is like to be a great beauty, and she
sets much by her.  Thence I to White Hall, and there saw Mr. Coventry come
to towne, and, with all my heart, am glad to see him, but could have no
talke with him, he being but just come.  Thence back and took up my wife,
and home, where a while, and then home to supper and to bed.

5th.  Up, and in Sir W. Batten's coach to White Hall, but the Duke being
gone forth, I to Westminster Hall, and there spent much time till towards
noon to and fro with people.  So by and by Mrs. Lane comes and plucks me
by the cloak to speak to me, and I was fain to go to her shop, and
pretending to buy some bands made her go home, and by and by followed her,
and there did what I would with her, and so after many discourses and her
intreating me to do something for her husband, which I promised to do, and
buying a little band of her, which I intend to keep to, I took leave,
there coming a couple of footboys to her with a coach to fetch her abroad
I know not to whom.  She is great with child, and she says I must be
godfather, but I do not intend it.  Thence by coach to the Old Exchange,
and there hear that the Dutch are fitting their ships out again, which
puts us to new discourse, and to alter our thoughts of the Dutch, as to
their want of courage or force.  Thence by appointment to the White Horse
Taverne in Lumbard Streete, and there dined with my Lord Rutherford, Povy,
Mr. Gauden, Creed, and others, and very merry, and after dinner among
other things Povy and I withdrew, and I plainly told him that I was
concerned in profit, but very justly, in this business of the Bill that I
have been these two or three days about, and he consents to it, and it
shall be paid.  He tells me how he believes, and in part knows, Creed to
be worth L10,000; nay, that now and then he [Povy] hath three or L4,000 in
his hands, for which he gives the interest that the King gives, which is
ten per cent., and that Creed do come and demand it every three months the
interest to be paid him, which Povy looks upon as a cunning and mean
tricke of him; but for all that, he will do and is very rich.  Thence to
the office, where we sat and where Mr. Coventry came the first time after
his return from sea, which I was glad of.  So after office to my office,
and then home to supper, and to my office again, and then late home to
bed.

7th.  Lay long, then up, and among others Bagwell's wife coming to speak
with me put new thoughts of folly into me which I am troubled at.  Thence
after doing business at my office, I by coach to my Lady Sandwich's, and
there dined with her, and found all well and merry.  Thence to White Hall,
and we waited on the Duke, who looks better than he did, methinks, before
his voyage; and, I think, a little more stern than he used to do. Thence
to the Temple to my cozen Roger Pepys, thinking to have met the Doctor to
have discoursed our business, but he came not, so I home, and there by
agreement came my Lord Rutherford, Povy, Gauden, Creed, Alderman
Backewell, about Tangier business of accounts between Rutherford and
Gauden.  Here they were with me an hour or more, then after drinking away,
and Povy and Creed staid and eat with me; but I was sorry I had no better
cheer for Povy; for the foole may be useful, and is a cunning fellow in
his way, which is a strange one, and that, that I meet not in any other
man, nor can describe in him.  They late with me, and when gone my boy and
I to musique, and then to bed.

8th.  Up, and to my office, where all the morning busy.  At noon dined at
home, and then to the office, where we sat all the afternoon.  In the
evening comes my aunt and uncle Wight, Mrs. Norbury, and her daughter, and
after them Mr. Norbury, where no great pleasure, my aunt being out of
humour in her fine clothes, and it raining hard.  Besides, I was a little
too bold with her about her doating on Dr. Venner.  Anon they went away,
and I till past 12 at night at my office, and then home to bed.

9th.  Up betimes and walked to Mr. Povy's, and there, not without some few
troublesome questions of his, I got a note, and went and received L117 5s.
of Alderman Viner upon my pretended freight of the "William" for Tangier,
which overbears me on one side with joy and on the other to think of my
condition if I shall be called into examination about it, and (though in
strictness it is due) not be able to give a good account of it.  Home with
it, and there comes Captain Taylor to me, and he and I did set even the
business of the ship Union lately gone for Tangier, wherein I hope to get
L50 more, for all which the Lord be praised.  At noon home to dinner, Mr.
Hunt and his wife with us, and very pleasant. Then in the afternoon I
carried them home by coach, and I to Westminster Hall, and thence to
Gervas's, and there find I cannot prevail with Jane to go forth with me,
but though I took a good occasion of going to the Trumpet she declined
coming, which vexed me.  'Je avait grande envie envers elle, avec vrai
amour et passion'.  Thence home and to my office till one in the morning,
setting to rights in writing this day's two accounts of Povy and Taylor,
and then quietly to bed.  This day I had several letters from several
places, of our bringing in great numbers of Dutch ships.

10th.  Lay long, at which I am ashamed, because of so many people
observing it that know not how late I sit up, and for fear of Sir W.
Batten's speaking of it to others, he having staid for me a good while. At
the office all the morning, where comes my Lord Brunkard with his patent
in his hand, and delivered it to Sir J. Minnes and myself, we alone being
there all the day, and at noon I in his coach with him to the 'Change,
where he set me down; a modest civil person he seems to be, but wholly
ignorant in the business of the Navy as possible, but I hope to make a
friend of him, being a worthy man.  Thence after hearing the great newes
of so many Dutchmen being brought in to Portsmouth and elsewhere, which it
is expected will either put them upon present revenge or despair, I with
Sir W. Rider and Cutler to dinner all alone to the Great James, where good
discourse, and, I hope, occasion of getting something hereafter.  After
dinner to White Hall to the Fishery, where the Duke was with us.  So home,
and late at my office, writing many letters, then home to supper and to
bed.  Yesterday come home, and this night I visited Sir W. Pen, who
dissembles great respect and love to me, but I understand him very well.
Major Holmes is come from Guinny, and is now at Plymouth with great
wealth, they say.

11th (Lord's day).  Up and to church alone in the morning.  Dined at home,
mighty pleasantly.  In the afternoon I to the French church, where much
pleased with the three sisters of the parson, very handsome, especially in
their noses, and sing prettily.  I heard a good sermon of the old man,
touching duty to parents.  Here was Sir Samuel Morland and his lady very
fine, with two footmen in new liverys (the church taking much notice of
them), and going into their coach after sermon with great gazeing.  So I
home, and my cozen, Mary Pepys's husband, comes after me, and told me that
out of the money he received some months since he did receive 18d. too
much, and did now come and give it me, which was very pretty.  So home,
and there found Mr. Andrews and his lady, a well-bred and a tolerable
pretty woman, and by and by Mr. Hill and to singing, and then to supper,
then to sing again, and so good night.  To prayers and tonight [bed].  It
is a little strange how these Psalms of Ravenscroft after 2 or 3 times
singing prove but the same again, though good.  No diversity appearing at
all almost.

12th.  Up, and with Sir W. Batten by coach to White Hall, where all of us
with the Duke; Mr. Coventry privately did tell me the reason of his advice
against our pretences to the Prize Office (in his letter from Portsmouth),
because he knew that the King and the Duke had resolved to put in some
Parliament men that have deserved well, and that would needs be obliged,
by putting them in.  Thence homeward, called at my bookseller's and
bespoke some books against the year's out, and then to the 'Change, and so
home to dinner, and then to the office, where my Lord Brunkard comes and
reads over part of our Instructions in the Navy--and I expounded it to
him, so he is become my disciple.  He gone, comes Cutler to tell us that
the King of France hath forbid any canvass to be carried out of his
kingdom, and I to examine went with him to the East India house to see a
letter, but came too late.  So home again, and there late till 12 at night
at my office, and then home to supper and to bed.  This day (to see how
things are ordered in the world), I had a command from the Earle of
Sandwich, at Portsmouth, not to be forward with Mr. Cholmly and Sir J.
Lawson about the Mole at Tangier, because that what I do therein will
(because of his friendship to me known) redound against him, as if I had
done it upon his score.  So I wrote to my Lord my mistake, and am
contented to promise never to pursue it more, which goes against my mind
with all my heart.

13th.  Lay long in bed, then up, and many people to speak with me.  Then
to my office, and dined at noon at home, then to the office again, where
we sat all the afternoon, and then home at night to a little supper, and
so after my office again at 12 at night home to bed.

14th.  Up, and after a while at the office, I abroad in several places,
among others to my bookseller's, and there spoke for several books against
New Year's day, I resolving to lay out about L7 or L8, God having given me
some profit extraordinary of late; and bespoke also some plate, spoons,
and forks.  I pray God keep me from too great expenses, though these will
still be pretty good money.  Then to the 'Change, and I home to dinner,
where Creed and Mr. Caesar, my boy's lute master, who plays indeed mighty
finely, and after dinner I abroad, parting from Creed, and away to and
fro, laying out or preparing for laying out more money, but I hope and
resolve not to exceed therein, and to-night spoke for some fruit for the
country for my father against Christmas, and where should I do it, but at
the pretty woman's, that used to stand at the doore in Fanchurch Streete,
I having a mind to know her.  So home, and late at my office, evening
reckonings with Shergoll, hoping to get money by the business, and so away
home to supper and to bed, not being very well through my taking cold of
late, and so troubled with some wind.

15th.  Called up very betimes by Mr. Cholmly, and with him a good while
about some of his Tangier accounts; and, discoursing of the condition of
Tangier, he did give me the whole account of the differences between
Fitzgerald and Norwood, which were very high on both sides, but most
imperious and base on Fitzgerald's, and yet through my Lord FitzHarding's
means, the Duke of York is led rather to blame Norwood and to speake that
he should be called home, than be sensible of the other.  He is a creature
of FitzHarding's, as a fellow that may be done with what he will, and,
himself certainly pretending to be Generall of the King's armies, when
Monk dyeth, desires to have as few great or wise men in employment as he
can now, but such as he can put in and keep under, which he do this
coxcomb Fitzgerald.  It seems, of all mankind there is no man so led by
another as the Duke is by Lord Muskerry and this FitzHarding. insomuch, as
when the King would have him to be Privy-Purse, the Duke wept, and said,
"But, Sir, I must have your promise, if you will have my dear Charles from
me, that if ever you have occasion for an army again, I may have him with
me; believing him to be the best commander of an army in the world."  But
Mr. Cholmly thinks, as all other men I meet with do, that he is a very
ordinary fellow.  It is strange how the Duke also do love naturally, and
affect the Irish above the English.  He, of the company he carried with
him to sea, took above two-thirds Irish and French.  He tells me the King
do hate my Lord Chancellor; and that they, that is the King and my Lord
FitzHarding, do laugh at him for a dull fellow; and in all this business
of the Dutch war do nothing by his advice, hardly consulting him.  Only he
is a good minister in other respects, and the King cannot be without him;
but, above all, being the Duke's father-in-law, he is kept in; otherwise
FitzHarding were able to fling down two of him.  This, all the wise and
grave lords see, and cannot help it; but yield to it.  But he bemoans what
the end of it may be, the King being ruled by these men, as he hath been
all along since his coming; to the razing all the strong-holds in
Scotland, and giving liberty to the Irish in Ireland, whom Cromwell had
settled all in one corner; who are now able, and it is feared everyday a
massacre again among them.  He being gone I abroad to the carrier's, to
see some things sent away to my father against Christmas, and thence to
Moorfields, and there up and down to several houses to drink to look for a
place 'pour rencontrer la femme de je sais quoi' against next Monday, but
could meet none.  So to the Coffeehouse, where great talke of the Comet
seen in several places; and among our men at sea, and by my Lord Sandwich,
to whom I intend to write about it to-night.  Thence home to dinner, and
then to the office, where all the afternoon, and in the evening home to
supper, and then to the office late, and so to bed.  This night I begun to
burn wax candles in my closett at the office, to try the charge, and to
see whether the smoke offends like that of tallow candles.

16th.  Up, and by water to Deptford, thinking to have met 'la femme de'
Bagwell, but failed, and having done some business at the yard, I back
again, it being a fine fresh morning to walk.  Back again, Mr. Wayth
walking with me to Half-Way House talking about Mr. Castle's fine knees
lately delivered in.  In which I am well informed that they are not as
they should be to make them knees, and I hope shall make good use of it to
the King's service.  Thence home, and having dressed myself, to the
'Change, and thence home to dinner, and so abroad by coach with my wife,
and bought a looking glasse by the Old Exchange, which costs me L5 5s. and
6s. for the hooks.  A very fair glasse.  So toward my cozen Scott's, but
meeting my Lady Sandwich's coach, my wife turned back to follow them,
thinking they might, as they did, go to visit her, and I 'light and to
Mrs. Harman, and there staid and talked in her shop with her, and much
pleased I am with her.  We talked about Anthony Joyce's giving over trade
and that he intends to live in lodgings, which is a very mad, foolish
thing.  She tells me she hears and believes it is because he, being now
begun to be called on offices, resolves not to take the new oathe, he
having formerly taken the Covenant or Engagement, but I think he do very
simply and will endeavour for his wife's sake to advise him therein.
Thence to my cozen Scott's, and there met my cozen Roger Pepys, and Mrs.
Turner, and The. and Joyce, and prated all the while, and so with the
"corps" to church and heard a very fine sermon of the Parson of the
parish, and so homeward with them in their coach, but finding it too late
to go home with me, I took another coach and so home, and after a while at
my office, home to supper and to bed.

17th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning.  At noon I to
the 'Change, and there, among others, had my first meeting with Mr.
L'Estrange, who hath endeavoured several times to speak with me.  It is to
get, now and then, some newes of me, which I shall, as I see cause, give
him.  He is a man of fine conversation, I think, but I am sure most
courtly and full of compliments.  Thence home to dinner, and then come the
looking-glass man to set up the looking-glass I bought yesterday, in my
dining-room, and very handsome it is.  So abroad by coach to White Hall,
and there to the Committee of Tangier, and then the Fishing.  Mr. Povy did
in discourse give me a rub about my late bill for money that I did get of
him, which vexed me and stuck in my mind all this evening, though I know
very well how to cleare myself at the worst.  So home and to my office,
where late, and then home to bed.  Mighty talke there is of this Comet
that is seen a'nights; and the King and Queene did sit up last night to
see it, and did, it seems.  And to-night I thought to have done so too;
but it is cloudy, and so no stars appear.  But I will endeavour it.  Mr.
Gray did tell me to-night, for certain, that the Dutch, as high as they
seem, do begin to buckle; and that one man in this Kingdom did tell the
King that he is offered L40,000 to make a peace, and others have been
offered money also.  It seems the taking of their Bourdeaux fleete thus,
arose from a printed Gazette of the Dutch's boasting of fighting, and
having beaten the English: in confidence whereof (it coming to Bourdeaux),
all the fleete comes out, and so falls into our hands.

18th (Lord's day).  To church, where, God forgive me! I spent most of my
time in looking [on] my new Morena--[a brunette]--at the other side of the
church, an acquaintance of Pegg Pen's.  So home to dinner, and then to my
chamber to read Ben Johnson's Cataline, a very excellent piece, and so to
church again, and thence we met at the office to hire ships, being in
great haste and having sent for several masters of ships to come to us.
Then home, and there Mr. Andrews and Hill come and we sung finely, and by
and by Mr. Fuller, the Parson, and supped with me, he and a friend of his,
but my musique friends would not stay supper.  At and after supper Mr.
Fuller and I told many storys of apparitions and delusions thereby, and I
out with my storys of Tom Mallard.  He gone, I a little to my office, and
then to prayers and to bed.

19th.  Going to bed betimes last night we waked betimes, and from our
people's being forced to take the key to go out to light a candle, I was
very angry and begun to find fault with my wife for not commanding her
servants as she ought.  Thereupon she giving me some cross answer I did
strike her over her left eye such a blow as the poor wretch did cry out
and was in great pain, but yet her spirit was such as to endeavour to bite
and scratch me.  But I coying--[stroking or caressing]--with her made her
leave crying, and sent for butter and parsley, and friends presently one
with another, and I up, vexed at my heart to think what I had done, for
she was forced to lay a poultice or something to her eye all day, and is
black, and the people of the house observed it.  But I was forced to rise,
and up and with Sir J. Minnes to White Hall, and there we waited on the
Duke.  And among other things Mr. Coventry took occasion to vindicate
himself before the Duke and us, being all there, about the choosing of
Taylor for Harwich.  Upon which the Duke did clear him, and did tell us
that he did expect, that, after he had named a man, none of us shall then
oppose or find fault with the man; but if we had anything to say, we ought
to say it before he had chose him.  Sir G. Carteret thought himself
concerned, and endeavoured to clear himself: and by and by Sir W. Batten
did speak, knowing himself guilty, and did confess, that being pressed by
the Council he did say what he did, that he was accounted a fanatique; but
did not know that at that time he had been appointed by his Royal
Highness.  To which the Duke [replied] that it was impossible but he must
know that he had appointed him; and so it did appear that the Duke did
mean all this while Sir W. Batten.  So by and by we parted, and Mr.
Coventry did privately tell me that he did this day take this occasion to
mention the business to give the Duke an opportunity of speaking his mind
to Sir W. Batten in this business, of which I was heartily glad.  Thence
home, and not finding Bagwell's wife as I expected, I to the 'Change and
there walked up and down, and then home, and she being come I bid her go
and stay at Mooregate for me, and after going up to my wife (whose eye is
very bad, but she is in very good temper to me), and after dinner I to the
place and walked round the fields again and again, but not finding her I
to the 'Change, and there found her waiting for me and took her away, and
to an alehouse, and there I made much of her, and then away thence and to
another and endeavoured to caress her, but 'elle ne voulait pas', which
did vex me, but I think it was chiefly not having a good easy place to do
it upon.  So we broke up and parted and I to the office, where we sat
hiring of ships an hour or two, and then to my office, and thence (with
Captain Taylor home to my house) to give him instructions and some notice
of what to his great satisfaction had happened to-day.  Which I do because
I hope his coming into this office will a little cross Sir W. Batten and
may do me good. He gone, I to supper with my wife, very pleasant, and then
a little to my office and to bed.  My mind, God forgive me, too much
running upon what I can 'ferais avec la femme de Bagwell demain', having
promised to go to Deptford and 'a aller a sa maison avec son mari' when I
come thither.

20th.  Up and walked to Deptford, where after doing something at the yard
I walked, without being observed, with Bagwell home to his house, and
there was very kindly used, and the poor people did get a dinner for me in
their fashion, of which I also eat very well.  After dinner I found
occasion of sending him abroad, and then alone 'avec elle je tentais a
faire ce que je voudrais et contre sa force je le faisais biens que passe
a mon contentment'.  By and by he coming back again I took leave and
walked home, and then there to dinner, where Dr. Fayrebrother come to see
me and Luellin.  We dined, and I to the office, leaving them, where we sat
all the afternoon, and I late at the office.  To supper and to the office
again very late, then home to bed.

21st.  Up, and after evening reckonings to this day with Mr. Bridges, the
linnen draper, for callicos, I out to Doctors' Commons, where by agreement
my cozen Roger and I did meet my cozen Dr. Tom Pepys, and there a great
many and some high words on both sides, but I must confess I was troubled;
first, to find my cozen Roger such a simple but well-meaning man as he is;
next to think that my father, out of folly and vain glory, should now and
then (as by their words I gather) be speaking how he had set up his son
Tom with his goods and house, and now these words are brought against
him--I fear to the depriving him of all the profit the poor man intended
to make of the lease of his house and sale of his owne goods.  I intend to
make a quiet end if I can with the Doctor, being a very foul-tounged fool
and of great inconvenience to be at difference with such a one that will
make the base noise about it that he will. Thence, very much vexed to find
myself so much troubled about other men's matters, I to Mrs. Turner's, in
Salsbury Court, and with her a little, and carried her, the porter staying
for me, our eagle, which she desired the other day, and we were glad to be
rid of her, she fouling our house of office mightily.  They are much
pleased with her.  And thence I home and after dinner to the office, where
Sir W. Rider and Cutler come, and in dispute I very high with them against
their demands, I hope to no hurt to myself, for I was very plain with them
to the best of my reason.  So they gone I home to supper, then to the
office again and so home to bed. My Lord Sandwich this day writes me word
that he hath seen (at Portsmouth) the Comet, and says it is the most
extraordinary thing that ever he saw.

22nd.  Up and betimes to my office, and then out to several places, among
others to Holborne to have spoke with one Mr. Underwood about some English
hemp, he lies against Gray's Inn.  Thereabouts I to a barber's shop to
have my hair cut, and there met with a copy of verses, mightily commended
by some gentlemen there, of my Lord Mordaunt's, in excuse of his going to
sea this late expedition, with the Duke of Yorke.  But, Lord! they are but
sorry things; only a Lord made them.  Thence to the 'Change; and there,
among the merchants, I hear fully the news of our being beaten to dirt at
Guinny, by De Ruyter with his fleete.  The particulars, as much as by Sir
G. Carteret afterwards I heard, I have said in a letter to my Lord
Sandwich this day at Portsmouth; it being most wholly to the utter ruine
of our Royall Company, and reproach and shame to the whole nation, as well
as justification to them in their doing wrong to no man as to his private
[property], only takeing whatever is found to belong to the Company, and
nothing else.  Dined at the Dolphin, Sir G. Carteret, Sir J. Minnes, Sir
W. Batten, and I, with Sir W. Boreman and Sir Theophilus Biddulph and
others, Commissioners of the Sewers, about our place below to lay masts
in.  But coming a little too soon, I out again, and tooke boat down to
Redriffe; and just in time within two minutes, and saw the new vessel of
Sir William Petty's launched, the King and Duke being there.

     [Pepys was wrong as to the name of Sir William Petty's new
     doublekeeled boat.  On February 13th, 1664-65, he gives the correct
     title, which was "The Experiment."]

It swims and looks finely, and I believe will do well.  The name I think
is Twilight, but I do not know certainly.  Coming away back immediately to
dinner, where a great deal of good discourse, and Sir G. Carteret's
discourse of this Guinny business, with great displeasure at the losse of
our honour there, and do now confess that the trade brought all these
troubles upon us between the Dutch and us.  Thence to the office and there
sat late, then I to my office and there till 12 at night, and so home to
bed weary.

23rd.  Up and to my office, then come by appointment cozen Tom Trice to
me, and I paid him the L20 remaining due to him upon the bond of L100
given him by agreement November, 1663, to end the difference between us
about my aunt's, his mother's, money.  And here, being willing to know the
worst, I told him, "I hope now there is nothing remaining between you and
I of future dispute."  "No," says he, "nothing at all that I know of, but
only a small matter of about 20 or 30s. that my father Pepys received for
me of rent due to me in the country, which I will in a day or two bring
you an account of," and so we parted.  Dined at home upon a good turkey
which Mr. Sheply sent us, then to the office all the afternoon, Mr. Cutler
and others coming to me about business.  I hear that the Dutch have
prepared a fleete to go the backway to the Streights, where without doubt
they will master our fleete.  This put to that of Guinny makes me fear
them mightily, and certainly they are a most wise people, and careful of
their business.  The King of France, they say, do declare himself obliged
to defend them, and lays claim by his Embassador to the wines we have
taken from the Dutch Bourdeaux men, and more, it is doubted whether the
Swede will be our friend or no.  Pray God deliver us out of these
troubles!  This day Sir W. Batten sent and afterwards spoke to me, to have
me and my wife come and dine with them on Monday next: which is a mighty
condescension in them, and for some great reason I am sure, or else it
pleases God by my late care of business to make me more considerable even
with them than I am sure they would willingly owne me to be.  God make me
thankfull and carefull to preserve myself so, for I am sure they hate me
and it is hope or fear that makes them flatter me. It being a bright
night, which it has not been a great while, I purpose to endeavour to be
called in the morning to see the Comet, though I fear we shall not see it,
because it rises in the east but 16 degrees, and then the houses will
hinder us.

24th.  Having sat up all night to past two o'clock this morning, our
porter, being appointed, comes and tells us that the bellman tells him
that the star is seen upon Tower Hill; so I, that had been all night
setting in order all my old papers in my chamber, did leave off all, and
my boy and I to Tower Hill, it being a most fine, bright moonshine night,
and a great frost; but no Comet to be seen.  So after running once round
the Hill, I and Tom, we home and then to bed.  Rose about 9 o'clock and
then to the office, where sitting all the morning.  At noon to the
'Change, to the Coffee-house; and there heard Sir Richard Ford tell the
whole story of our defeat at Guinny.  Wherein our men are guilty of the
most horrid cowardice and perfidiousness, as he says and tells it, that
ever Englishmen were.  Captain Raynolds, that was the only commander of
any of the King's ships there, was shot at by De Ruyter, with a bloody
flag flying.  He, instead of opposing (which, indeed, had been to no
purpose, but only to maintain honour), did poorly go on board himself, to
ask what De Ruyter would have; and so yielded to whatever Ruyter would
desire.  The King and Duke are highly vexed at it, it seems, and the
business deserves it.  Thence home to dinner, and then abroad to buy some
things, and among others to my bookseller's, and there saw several books I
spoke for, which are finely bound and good books to my great content. So
home and to my office, where late.  This evening I being informed did look
and saw the Comet, which is now, whether worn away or no I know not, but
appears not with a tail, but only is larger and duller than any other
star, and is come to rise betimes, and to make a great arch, and is gone
quite to a new place in the heavens than it was before: but I hope in a
clearer night something more will be seen.  So home to bed.

25th (Lord's day and Christmas day).  Up (my wife's eye being ill still of
the blow I did in a passion give her on Monday last) to church alone,
where Mr. Mills, a good sermon.  To dinner at home, where very pleasant
with my wife and family.  After dinner I to Sir W. Batten's, and there
received so much good usage (as I have of late done) from him and my Lady,
obliging me and my wife, according to promise, to come and dine with them
to-morrow with our neighbours, that I was in pain all the day, and night
too after, to know how to order the business of my wife's not going, and
by discourse receive fresh instances of Sir J. Minnes's folly in
complaining to Sir G. Carteret of Sir W. Batten and me for some family
offences, such as my having of a stopcock to keepe the water from them,
which vexes me, but it would more but that Sir G. Carteret knows him very
well.  Thence to the French church, but coming too late I returned and to
Mr. Rawlinson's church, where I heard a good sermon of one that I remember
was at Paul's with me, his name Maggett; and very great store of fine
women there is in this church, more than I know anywhere else about us.
So home and to my chamber, looking over and setting in order my papers and
books, and so to supper, and then to prayers and to bed.

26th.  Up, and with Sir W. Pen to White Hall, and there with the rest did
our usual business before the Duke, and then with Sir W. Batten back and
to his house, where I by sicknesse excused my wife's coming to them
to-day.  Thence I to the Coffeehouse, where much good discourse, and all
the opinion now is that the Dutch will avoid fighting with us at home, but
do all the hurte they can to us abroad; which it may be they may for a
while, but that, I think, cannot support them long.  Thence to Sir W.
Batten's, where Mr. Coventry and all our families here, women and all, and
Sir R. Ford and his, and a great feast and good discourse and merry, there
all the afternoon and evening till late, only stepped in to see my wife,
then to my office to enter my day's work, and so home to bed, where my
people and wife innocently at cards very merry, and I to bed, leaving them
to their sport and blindman's buff.

27th.  My people came to bed, after their sporting, at four o'clock in the
morning; I up at seven, and to Deptford and Woolwich in a gally; the Duke
calling to me out of the barge in which the King was with him going down
the river, to know whither I was going.  I told him to Woolwich, but was
troubled afterward I should say no farther, being in a gally, lest he
think me too profuse in my journeys.  Did several businesses, and then
back again by two o'clock to Sir J. Minnes's to dinner by appointment,
where all yesterday's company but Mr. Coventry, who could not come.  Here
merry, and after an hour's chat I down to the office, where busy late, and
then home to supper and to bed.  The Comet appeared again to-night, but
duskishly.  I went to bed, leaving my wife and all her folks, and Will
also, too, come to make Christmas gambolls to-night.

28th.  I waked in the morning about 6 o'clock and my wife not come to bed;
I lacked a pot, but there was none, and bitter cold, so was forced to rise
and piss in the chimney, and to bed again.  Slept a little longer, and
then hear my people coming up, and so I rose, and my wife to bed at eight
o'clock in the morning, which vexed me a little, but I believe there was
no hurt in it all, but only mirthe, therefore took no notice.  I abroad
with Sir W. Batten to the Council Chamber, where all of us to discourse
about the way of measuring ships and the freight fit to give for them by
the tun, where it was strange methought to hear so poor discourses among
the Lords themselves, and most of all to see how a little empty matter
delivered gravely by Sir W. Pen was taken mighty well, though nothing in
the earth to the purpose.  But clothes, I perceive more and more every
day, is a great matter.  Thence home with Sir W. Batten by coach, and I
home to dinner, finding my wife still in bed.  After dinner abroad, and
among other things visited my Lady Sandwich, and was there, with her and
the young ladies, playing at cards till night.  Then home and to my office
late, then home to bed, leaving my wife and people up to more sports, but
without any great satisfaction to myself therein.

29th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning.  Then whereas I
should have gone and dined with Sir W. Pen (and the rest of the officers
at his house), I pretended to dine with my Lady Sandwich and so home,
where I dined well, and began to wipe and clean my books in my chamber in
order to the settling of my papers and things there thoroughly, and then
to the office, where all the afternoon sitting, and in the evening home to
supper, and then to my work again.

30th.  Lay very long in bed with my wife, it being very cold, and my wife
very full of a resolution to keepe within doors, not so much as to go to
church or see my Lady Sandwich before Easter next, which I am willing
enough to, though I seem the contrary.  This and other talke kept me a-bed
till almost 10 a'clock.  Then up and made an end of looking over all my
papers and books and taking everything out of my chamber to have all made
clean.  At noon dined, and after dinner forth to several places to pay
away money, to clear myself in all the world, and, among others, paid my
bookseller L6 for books I had from him this day, and the silversmith L22
18s. for spoons, forks, and sugar box, and being well pleased with seeing
my business done to my mind as to my meeting with people and having my
books ready for me, I home and to my office, and there did business late,
and then home to supper, prayers, and to bed.

31st.  At the office all the morning, and after dinner there again,
dispatched first my letters, and then to my accounts, not of the month but
of the whole yeare also, and was at it till past twelve at night, it being
bitter cold; but yet I was well satisfied with my worke, and, above all,
to find myself, by the great blessing of God, worth L1349, by which, as I
have spent very largely, so I have laid up above L500 this yeare above
what I was worth this day twelvemonth.  The Lord make me for ever thankful
to his holy name for it!  Thence home to eat a little and so to bed.  Soon
as ever the clock struck one, I kissed my wife in the kitchen by the
fireside, wishing her a merry new yeare, observing that I believe I was
the first proper wisher of it this year, for I did it as soon as ever the
clock struck one.

So ends the old yeare, I bless God, with great joy to me, not only from my
having made so good a yeare of profit, as having spent L420 and laid up
L540 and upwards; but I bless God I never have been in so good plight as
to my health in so very cold weather as this is, nor indeed in any hot
weather, these ten years, as I am at this day, and have been these four or
five months.  But I am at a great losse to know whether it be my hare's
foote, or taking every morning of a pill of turpentine, or my having left
off the wearing of a gowne.  My family is, my wife, in good health, and
happy with her; her woman Mercer, a pretty, modest, quiett mayde; her
chambermayde Besse, her cook mayde Jane, the little girl Susan, and my
boy, which I have had about half a yeare, Tom Edwards, which I took from
the King's chappell, and a pretty and loving quiett family I have as any
man in England.  My credit in the world and my office grows daily, and I
am in good esteeme with everybody, I think. My troubles of my uncle's
estate pretty well over; but it comes to be but of little profit to us, my
father being much supported by my purse.  But great vexations remain upon
my father and me from my brother Tom's death and ill condition, both to
our disgrace and discontent, though no great reason for either.  Publique
matters are all in a hurry about a Dutch warr.  Our preparations great;
our provocations against them great; and, after all our presumption, we
are now afeard as much of them, as we lately contemned them.  Every thing
else in the State quiett, blessed be God!  My Lord Sandwich at sea with
the fleete at Portsmouth; sending some about to cruise for taking of
ships, which we have done to a great number.  This Christmas I judged it
fit to look over all my papers and books; and to tear all that I found
either boyish or not to be worth keeping, or fit to be seen, if it should
please God to take me away suddenly.  Among others, I found these two or
three notes, which I thought fit to keep.




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Irish in Ireland, whom Cromwell had settled all in one corner
     Tear all that I found either boyish or not to be worth keeping





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, December 1664
by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***

***** This file should be named 4152.txt or 4152.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/5/4152/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
