Project Gutenberg's Diary of Samuel Pepys, August 1668, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, August 1668

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: December 1, 2004 [EBook #4191]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, AUGUST 1668 ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                 AUGUST
                                  1668

August 1st.  All the morning at the office.  After dinner my wife, and
Deb., and I, to the King's house again, coming too late yesterday to hear
the prologue, and do like the play better now than before; and, indeed,
there is a great deal of true wit in it, more than in the common sort of
plays, and so home to my business, and at night to bed, my eyes making me
sad.

2nd. (Lord's day).  Up and at home all the morning, hanging, and removing
of some pictures, in my study and house.  At noon Pelling dined with me.
After dinner, I and Tom, my boy, by water up to Putney, and there heard a
sermon, and many fine people in the church.  Thence walked to Barne Elmes,
and there, and going and coming, did make the boy read to me several
things, being now-a-days unable to read myself anything, for above two
lines together, but my eyes grow weary.  Home about night, and so to
supper and then to bed.

3rd.  Up, and by water to White Hall and St. James's, where I did much
business, and about noon meeting Dr. Gibbons, carried him to the Sun
taverne, in King Street, and there made him, and some friends of his,
drink; among others, Captain Silas Taylor, and here did get Gibbons to
promise me some things for my flageolets.  So to the Old Exchange, and
then home to dinner, and so, Mercer dining with us, I took my wife and her
and Deb. out to Unthanke's, while I to White Hall to the Commissioners of
the Treasury, and so back to them and took them out to Islington, where we
met with W. Joyce and his wife and boy, and there eat and drank, and a
great deal of his idle talk, and so we round by Hackney home, and so to
sing a little in the garden, and then to bed.

4th.  Up, and to my office a little, and then to White Hall about a
Committee for Tangier at my Lord Arlington's, where, by Creed's being out
of town, I have the trouble given me of drawing up answers to the
complaints of the Turks of Algiers, and so I have all the papers put into
my hand.  Here till noon, and then back to the Office, where sat a little,
and then to dinner, and presently to the office, where come to me my Lord
Bellassis, Lieutenant-Colonell Fitzgerald, newly come from Tangier, and
Sir Arthur Basset, and there I received their informations, and so, they
being gone, I with my clerks and another of Lord Brouncker's, Seddon, sat
up till two in the morning, drawing up my answers and writing them fair,
which did trouble me mightily to sit up so long, because of my eyes.

5th.  So to bed about two o'clock, and then up about seven and to White
Hall, where read over my report to Lord Arlington and Berkeley, and then
afterward at the Council Board with great good liking, but, Lord! how it
troubled my eyes, though I did not think I could have done it, but did do
it, and was not very bad afterward.  So home to dinner, and thence out to
the Duke of York's playhouse, and there saw "The Guardian;" formerly the
same, I find, that was called "Cutter of Coleman Street;" a silly play.
And thence to Westminster Hall, where I met Fitzgerald; and with him to a
tavern, to consider of the instructions for Sir Thomas Allen, against his
going to Algiers; he and I being designed to go down to Portsmouth by the
Council's order, and by and by he and I went to the Duke of York, who
orders me to go down to-morrow morning.  So I away home, and there bespeak
a coach; and so home and to bed, my wife being abroad with the Mercers
walking in the fields, and upon the water.

6th.  Waked betimes, and my wife, at an hour's warning, is resolved to go
with me, which pleases me, her readiness.  But, before ready, comes a
letter from Fitzgerald, that he is seized upon last night by an order of
the General's by a file of musqueteers, and kept prisoner in his chamber.
The Duke of York did tell me of it to-day: it is about a quarrel between.
him and Witham, and they fear a challenge: so I to him, and sent my wife
by the coach round to Lambeth.  I lost my labour going to his lodgings,
and he in bed: and, staying a great while for him, I at last grew
impatient, and would stay no longer; but to St. James's to Mr. Wren, to
bid him "God be with you!" and so over the water to Fox Hall; and there my
wife and Deb. come and took me up, and we away to Gilford, losing our way
for three or four mile, about Cobham.  At Gilford we dined; and, I shewed
them the hospitall there of Bishop Abbot's, and his tomb in the church,
which, and the rest of the tombs there, are kept mighty clean and neat,
with curtains before them.  So to coach again, and got to Lippock,2 late
over Hindhead, having an old man, a guide, in the coach with us; but got
thither with great fear of being out of our way, it being ten at night.
Here good, honest people; and after supper, to bed .  .  .  .

7th.  Up, and to coach, and with a guide to Petersfield, where I find Sir
Thomas Allen and Mr. Tippets come; the first about the business, the
latter only in respect to me; as also Fitzgerald, who come post all last
night, and newly arrived here.  We four sat down presently to our
business, and in an hour despatched all our talk; and did inform Sir
Thomas Allen well in it, who, I perceive, in serious matters, is a serious
man: and tells me he wishes all we are told be true, in our defence; for
he finds by all, that the Turks have, to this day, been very civil to our
merchant-men everywhere; and, if they would have broke with us, they never
had such an opportunity over our rich merchant-men, as lately, coming out
of the Streights.  Then to dinner, and pretty merry: and here was Mr.
Martin, the purser, and dined with us, and wrote some things for us.  And
so took coach again back; Fitzgerald with us, whom I was pleased with all
the day, with his discourse of his observations abroad, as being a great
soldier and of long standing abroad: and knows all things and persons
abroad very well--I mean, the great soldiers of France, and Spain, and
Germany; and talks very well. Come at night to Gilford, where the Red Lyon
so full of people, and a wedding, that the master of the house did get us
a lodging over the way, at a private house, his landlord's, mighty neat
and fine; and there supped and talked with the landlord and his wife: and
so to bed with great content, only Fitzgerald lay at the Inne.  So to bed.

8th.  Up, and I walked out, and met Uncle Wight, whom I sent to last
night, and Mr. Wight coming to see us, and I walked with them back to see
my aunt at Katherine Hill, and there walked up and down the hill and
places, about: but a dull place, but good ayre, and the house dull.  But
here I saw my aunt, after many days not seeing her--I think, a year or
two; and she walked with me to see my wife.  And here, at the Red Lyon, we
all dined together, and mighty merry, and then parted: and we home to Fox
Hall, where Fitzgerald and I 'light, and by water to White Hall, where the
Duke of York being abroad, I by coach and met my wife, who went round, and
after doing at the office a little, and finding all well at home, I to
bed.  I hear that Colbert, the French Ambassador, is come, and hath been
at Court incognito.  When he hath his audience, I know not.

9th (Lord's day).  Up, and walked to Holborne, where got John Powell's
coach at the Black Swan, and he attended me at St. James's, where waited
on the Duke of York: and both by him and several of the Privy-Council,
beyond expectation, I find that my going to Sir Thomas Allen was looked
upon as a thing necessary: and I have got some advantage by it, among
them.  Thence to White Hall, and thence to visit Lord Brouncker, and back
to White Hall, where saw the Queen and ladies; and so, with Mr. Slingsby,
to Mrs. Williams's, thinking to dine with Lord Brouncker there, but did
not, having promised my wife to come home, though here I met Knepp, to my
great content.  So home; and, after dinner, I took my wife and Deb. round
by Hackney, and up and down to take the ayre; and then home, and made
visits to Mrs. Turner, and Mrs. Mercer, and Sir W. Pen, who is come from
Epsom not well, and Sir J. Minnes, who is not well neither.  And so home
to supper, and to set my books a little right, and then to bed. This day
Betty Michell come and dined with us, the first day after her lying in,
whom I was glad to see.

10th.  Up, and by water to White Hall, and thence to Sir W. Coventry, but
he is gone out of town this morning, so thence to my Lord Arlington's
house, the first time I there since he come thither, at Goring House, a
very fine, noble place; and there he received me in sight of several Lords
with great respect.  I did give him an account of my journey; and here,
while I waited for him a little, my Lord Orrery took notice of me, and
begun discourse of hangings, and of the improvement of shipping: I not
thinking that he knew me, but did then discover it, with a mighty
compliment of my abilities and ingenuity, which I am mighty proud of; and
he do speak most excellently.  Thence to Westminster Hall, and so by coach
to the old Exchange, and there did several businesses, and so home to
dinner, and then abroad to Duck Lane, where I saw my belle femme of the
book vendor, but had no opportunity para hazer con her.  So away to
Cooper's, where I spent all the afternoon with my wife and girl, seeing
him-make an end of her picture, which he did Jo my great content, though
not so great as, I confess, I expected, being not satisfied in the
greatness of the resemblance, nor in the blue garment: but it is most
certainly a most rare piece of work, as to the painting.  He hath L30 for
his work--and the chrystal, and case, and gold case comes to L8 3s. 4d.;
and which I sent him this night, that I might be out of debt. Thence my
people home, and I to Westminster Hall about a little business, and so by
water home [to] supper, and my wife to read a ridiculous book I bought
today of the History of the Taylors' Company,

     [The title of this book was, "The Honour of the Merchant Taylors."
     Wherein is set forth the noble acts, valliant deeds, and heroick
     performances of Merchant Taylors in former ages; their honourable
     loves, and knightly adventures, their combating of foreign enemies
     and glorious successes in honour of the English nation: together
     with their pious....]

and all the while Deb. did comb my head, and I did toker her with my main
para very great pleasure, and so to bed.

11th.  Up, and by water to Sir W. Coventry to visit him, whom I find yet
troubled at the Commissioners of Accounts, about this business of Sir W.
Warren, which is a ridiculous thing, and can come to nothing but contempt,
and thence to Westminster Hall, where the Parliament met enough to
adjourne, which they did, to the 10th of November next, and so by water
home to the office, and so to dinner, and thence at the Office all the
afternoon till night, being mightily pleased with a little trial I have
made of the use of a tube-spectacall of paper, tried with my right eye.
This day I hear that, to the great joy of the Nonconformists, the time is
out of the Act against them, so that they may meet: and they have declared
that they will have a morning lecture

     [During the troubled reign of Charles I., the House of Commons gave
     parishioners the right of appointing lecturers at the various
     churches without the consent of rector or vicar, and this naturally
     gave rise to many quarrels.  In the early period of the war between
     the king and the parliament, a course of sermons or lectures was
     projected in aid of the parliamentary cause.  These lectures, which
     were preached by eminent Presbyterian divines at seven o'clock on
     the Sunday mornings, were commenced in the church of St. Mary
     Magdalen in Milk Street, but were soon afterwards removed to St.
     Giles's, Cripplegate.  After the Restoration the lectures were
     collected in four volumes, and published under the title of the
     "Cripplegate Morning Exercises," vol. i. in 1661; vol. ii. in 1674;
     vol. iii. in 1682; and vol. iv. in 1690.  In addition there were two
     volumes which form a supplement to the work, viz., "The Morning
     Exercises methodized," preached at St. Giles's-in-the-Fields, edited
     by the Rev. Thomas Case in 1660, and the "Exercises against Popery,"
     preached in Southwark, and published in 1675 (see Demon's "Records
     of St. Giles's, Crinnlegate," 1883, pp. 55-56).]

up again, which is pretty strange; and they are connived at by the King
every where, I hear, in City and country.  So to visit W. Pen, who is yet
ill, and then home, where W. Batelier and Mrs. Turner come and sat and
supped with us, and so they gone we to bed.  This afternoon my wife, and
Mercer, and Deb., went with Pelting to see the gypsies at Lambeth, and
have their fortunes told; but what they did, I did not enquire.

12th.  Up, and all the morning busy at my office.  Thence to the Excise
Office, and so to the Temple to take counsel about Major Nicholls's
business for the King.  So to several places about business, and among
others to Drumbleby's about the mouths for my paper tubes, and so to the
'Change and home.  Met Captain Cocke, who tells me that he hears for
certain the Duke of York will lose the authority of an Admiral, and be
governed by a Committee: and all our Office changed; only they are in
dispute whether I shall continue or no, which puts new thoughts in me, but
I know not whether to be glad or sorry.  Home to dinner, where Pelting
dines with us, and brings some partridges, which is very good meat; and,
after dinner, I, and wife, and Mercer, and Deb., to the Duke of York's
house, and saw "Mackbeth," to our great content, and then home, where the
women went to the making of my tubes, and I to the office, and then come
Mrs. Turner and her husband to advise about their son, the Chaplain, who
is turned out of his ship, a sorrow to them, which I am troubled for, and
do give them the best advice I can, and so they gone we to bed.

13th.  Up, and Greeting comes, and there he and I tried some things of Mr.
Locke's for two flageolets, to my great content, and this day my wife
begins again to learn of him; for I have a great mind for her to be able
to play a part with me.  Thence I to the Office, where all the afternoon
[morning??], and then to dinner, where W. Howe dined with me, who tells me
for certain that Creed is like to speed in his match with Mrs. Betty
Pickering.  Here dined with me also Mr. Hollier, who is mighty vain in his
pretence to talk Latin.  So to the Office again all the afternoon till
night, very busy, and so with much content home, and made my wife sing and
play on the flageolet to me till I slept with great pleasure in bed.

14th.  Up, and by water to White Hall and St. James's, and to see Sir W.
Coventry, and discourse about business of our Office, telling him my
trouble there, to see how things are ordered.  I told him also what Cocke
told me the other day, but he says there is not much in it, though he do
know that this hath been in the eye of some persons to compass for the
turning all things in the navy, and that it looks so like a popular thing
as that he thinks something may be done in it, but whether so general or
no, as I tell it him, he knows not.  Thence to White Hall, and there wait
at the Council-chamber door a good while, talking with one or other, and
so home by water, though but for a little while, because I am to return to
White Hall.  At home I find Symson, putting up my new chimney-piece, in
our great chamber, which is very fine, but will cost a great deal of
money, but it is not flung away.  So back to White Hall, and after the
council up, I with Mr. Wren, by invitation, to Sir Stephen Fox's to
dinner, where the Cofferer and Sir Edward Savage; where many good stories
of the antiquity and estates of many families at this day in Cheshire, and
that part of the kingdom, more than what is on this side, near London.  My
Lady [Fox] dining with us; a very good lady, and a family governed so
nobly and neatly as do me good to see it.  Thence the Cofferer, Sir
Stephen, and I to the Commissioners of the Treasury about business: and so
I up to the Duke of York, who enquired for what I had promised him, about
my observations of the miscarriages of our Office;

     [This refers to the letter on the affairs of the office which Pepys
     prepared, and respecting which, and the proceedings which grew out
     of it, so many references are made in future pages of the Diary.]

and I told him he should have it next week, being glad he called for it;
for I find he is concerned to do something, and to secure himself thereby,
I believe: for the world is labouring to eclipse him, I doubt; I mean, the
factious part of the Parliament.  The Office met this afternoon as usual,
and waited on him; where, among other things, he talked a great while of
his intentions of going to Dover soon, to be sworn as Lord Warden, which
is a matter of great ceremony and state, and so to the Temple with Mr.
Wren, to the Attorney's chamber, about business, but he abroad, and so I
home, and there spent the evening talking with my wife and piping, and
pleased with our chimney-piece, and so to bed.

15th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning busy, and after dinner
with my wife, Mercer, and Deb., to the King's playhouse, and there saw
"Love's Mistresse" revived, the thing pretty good, but full of variety of
divertisement.  So home and to my business at the office, my eyes bad
again, and so to bed.

16th (Lord's day).  All the morning at my Office with W. Hewer, there
drawing up my Report to the Duke of York, as I have promised, about the
faults of this Office, hoping thereby to have opportunity of doing myself
[something].  At noon to dinner, and again with him to work all the
afternoon till night, till I was weary and had despatched a good deal of
business, and so to bed after hearing my wife read a little.

17th.  Up, and by water to White Hall, and so to St. James's, and thence
with Mr. Wren by appointment in his coach to Hampstead, to speak with the
Atturney-general, whom we met in the fields, by his old route and house;
and after a little talk about our business of Ackeworth, went and saw the
Lord Wotton's house and garden, which is wonderfull fine: too good for the
house the gardens are, being, indeed, the most noble that ever I saw, and
brave orange and lemon trees.  Thence to Mr. Chichley's by invitation, and
there dined with Sir John, his father not coming home. And while at dinner
comes by the French Embassador Colbert's mules, the first I eversaw, with
their sumpter-clothes mighty rich, and his coaches, he being to have his
entry to-day: but his things, though rich, are not new; supposed to be the
same his brother

     [A mistake of Pepys's.  Colbert de Croissy, then in England, had
     himself been the French Plenipotentiary at Aix-la-Chapelle.--B.]

had the other day, at the treaty at Aix-la-Chapelle, in Flanders.  Thence
to the Duke of York's house, and there saw "Cupid's Revenge," under the
new name of "Love Despised," that hath something very good in it, though I
like not the whole body of it.  This day the first time acted here. Thence
home, and there with Mr. Hater and W. Hewer late, reading over all the
principal officers' instructions in order to my great work upon my hand,
and so to bed, my eyes very ill.

18th.  Up, and to my office about my great business betimes, and so to the
office, where all the morning.  At noon dined, and then to the office all
the afternoon also, and in the evening to Sir W. Coventry's, but he not
within, I took coach alone to the Park, to try to meet him there, but did
not; but there were few coaches, but among the few there were in two
coaches our two great beauties, my Lady Castlemayne and Richmond; the
first time I saw the latter since she had the smallpox.  I had much
pleasure to see them, but I thought they were strange one to another.
Thence going out I met a coach going, which I thought had Knepp in it, so
I went back, but it was not she.  So back to White Hall and there took
water, and so home, and busy late about my great letter to the Duke of
York, and so to supper and to bed .  .  .  .

19th.  Up betimes, and all day and afternoon without going out, busy upon
my great letter to the Duke of York, which goes on to my content. W. Hewer
and Gibson I employ with me in it.  This week my people wash, over the
water, and so I little company at home.  In the evening, being busy above,
a great cry I hear, and go down; and what should it be but Jane, in a fit
of direct raving, which lasted half-an-hour.  Beyond four or five of our
strength to keep her down; and, when all come to all, a fit of jealousy
about Tom, with whom she is in love.  So at night, I, and my wife, and W.
Hewer called them to us, and there I did examine all the thing, and them,
in league.  She in love, and he hath got her to promise him to marry, and
he is now cold in it, so that I must rid my hands of them, which troubles
me, and the more because my head is now busy upon other greater things.  I
am vexed also to be told by W. Hewer that he is summoned to the
Commissioners of Accounts about receiving a present of L30 from Mr. Mason,
the timber merchant, though there be no harm in it, that will appear on
his part, he having done them several lawful kindnesses and never demanded
anything, as they themselves have this day declared to the Commissioners,
they being forced up by the discovery of somebody that they in confidence
had once told it to. So to supper vexed and my head full of care, and so
to bed.

20th.  Betimes at my business again, and so to the office, and dined with
Brouncker and J. Minnes, at Sir W. Pen's at a bad pasty of venison, and so
to work again, and at it till past twelve at night, that I might get my
great letter

     [In the Pepysian Library is a MS. (No. 2242), entitled, "Papers
     conteyning my addresse to his Royall Highnesse James Duke of Yorke,
     Lord High Admirall of England, &c., by letter dated the 20th of
     August, 1668, humbly tendering him my advice touching the present
     State of the Office of the Navy, with his Royall Highness's
     proceedings upon the same, and their result."]

to the Duke of York ready against to-morrow, which I shall do, to my great
content.  So to bed.

21st.  Up betimes, and with my people again to work, and finished all
before noon: and then I by water to White Hall, and there did tell the
Duke of York that I had done; and he hath to my great content desired me
to come to him at Sunday next in the afternoon, to read it over, by which
I have more time to consider and correct it.  So back home and to the
'Change, in my way calling at Morris', my vintner's, where I love to see
su moher, though no acquaintance accostais this day con her.  Did several
things at the 'Change, and so home to dinner.  After dinner I by coach to
my bookseller's in Duck Lane, and there did spend a little time and
regarder su moher, and so to St. James's, where did a little ordinary
business; and by and by comes Monsieur Colbert, the French Embassador, to
make his first visit to the Duke of York, and then to the Duchess: and I
saw it: a silly piece of ceremony, he saying only a few formal words.  A
comely man, and in a black suit and cloak of silk, which is a strange
fashion, now it hath been so long left off: This day I did first see the
Duke of York's room of pictures of some Maids of Honour, done by Lilly:
good, but not like.

     [The set of portraits known as "King Charles's Beauties," formerly
     in Windsor Castle, but now at Hampton Court.--B.]

Thence to Reeves's, and bought a reading-glass, and so to my bookseller's
again, there to buy a Book of Martyrs,

     [The popular name of John Fox's "Acts and Monuments," first
     published in 1562-63.]

which I did agree for; and so, after seeing and beginning acquaintance con
his femme, but very little, away home, and there busy very late at the
correcting my great letter to the Duke of York, and so to bed.

22nd.  Up betimes, at it again with great content, and so to the Office,
where all the morning, and did fall out with W. Pen about his slight
performance of his office, and so home to dinner, fully satisfied that
this Office must sink or the whole Service be undone.  To the office all
the afternoon again, and then home to supper and to bed, my mind being
pretty well at ease, my great letter being now finished to my full
content; and I thank God I have opportunity of doing it, though I know it
will set the Office and me by the ears for ever.  This morning Captain
Cocke comes, and tells me that he is now assured that it is true, what he
told me the other day, that our whole Office will be turned out, only me,
which, whether he says true or no, I know not, nor am much concerned,
though I should be better contented to have it thus than otherwise.  This
afternoon, after I was weary in my business of the office, I went forth to
the 'Change, thinking to have spoke with Captain Cocke, but he was not
within.  So I home, and took London-bridge in my way; walking down Fish
Street and Gracious Street, to see how very fine a descent they have now
made down the hill, that it is become very easy and pleasant, and going
through Leaden-Hall, it being market-day, I did see a woman catched, that
had stolen a shoulder of mutton off of a butcher's stall, and carrying it
wrapt up in a cloth, in a basket.  The jade was surprised, and did not
deny it, and the woman so silly, as to let her go that took it, only
taking the meat.

23rd (Lord's day).  Up betimes, my head busy in my great letter, and I did
first hang up my new map of Paris in my green room, and changed others in
other places.  Then to Captain Cocke's, thinking to have talked more of
what he told me yesterday, but he was not within.  So back to church, and
heard a good sermon of Mr. Gifford's at our church, upon "Seek ye first
the kingdom of Heaven and its righteousness, and all these things shall be
added to you."  A very excellent and persuasive, good and moral sermon.
Shewed, like a wise man, that righteousness is a surer moral way of being
rich, than sin and villainy.  Then home to dinner, where Mr. Pelting, who
brought us a hare, which we had at dinner, and W. Howe.  After dinner to
the Office, Mr. Gibson and I, to examine my letter to the Duke of York,
which, to my great joy, I did very well by my paper tube, without pain to
my eyes.  And I do mightily like what I have therein done; and did,
according to the Duke of York's order, make haste to St. James's, and
about four o'clock got thither: and there the Duke of York was ready, to
expect me, and did hear it all over with extraordinary content; and did
give me many and hearty thanks, and in words the most expressive tell me
his sense of my good endeavours, and that he would have a care of me on
all occasions; and did, with much inwardness,--[i.e., intimacy.]--tell me
what was doing, suitable almost to what Captain Cocke tells me, of designs
to make alterations in the Navy; and is most open to me in them, and with
utmost confidence desires my further advice on all occasions: and he
resolves to have my letter transcribed, and sent forthwith to the Office.
So, with as much satisfaction as I could possibly, or did hope for, and
obligation on the Duke of York's side professed to me, I away into the
Park, and there met Mr. Pierce and his wife, and sister and brother, and a
little boy, and with them to Mulberry Garden, and spent I 18s. on them,
and there left them, she being again with child, and by it, the least
pretty that ever I saw her. And so I away, and got a coach, and home, and
there with my wife and W. Hewer, talking all the evening, my mind running
on the business of the Office, to see what more I can do to the rendering
myself acceptable and useful to all and to the King.  We to supper, and to
bed.

24th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning upon considerations on
the Victualler's contract, and then home to dinner, where my wife is upon
hanging the long chamber where the girl lies, with the sad stuff that was
in the best chamber, in order to the hanging that with tapestry. So to
dinner, and then to the office again, where all the afternoon till night,
we met to discourse upon the alterations which are propounded to be made
in the draft of the victualler's contract which we did lately make, and
then we being up comes Mr. Child, Papillion and Littleton, his partners,
to discourse upon the matter with me, which I did, and spent all the
evening with them at the office, and so, they being gone, I to supper and
talk with my wife, and so to bed.

25th.  Up, and by water to St. James's, and there, with Mr. Wren, did
discourse about my great letter, which the Duke of York hath given him:
and he hath set it to be transcribed by Billings, his man, whom, as he
tells me, he can most confide in for secresy, and is much pleased with it,
and earnest to have it be; and he and I are like to be much together in
the considering how to reform the Office, and that by the Duke of York's
command.  Thence I, mightily pleased with this success, away to the
Office, where all the morning, my head full of this business.  And it is
pretty how Lord Brouncker this day did tell me how he hears that a design
is on foot to remove us out of the Office: and proposes that we two do
agree to draw up a form of a new constitution of the Office, there to
provide remedies for the evils we are now under, so that we may be
beforehand with the world, which I agreed to, saying nothing of my design;
and, the truth is, he is the best man of them all, and I would be glad,
next myself, to save him; for, as he deserves best, so I doubt he needs
his place most.  So home to dinner at noon, and all the afternoon busy at
the office till night, and then with my mind full of business now in my
head, I to supper and to bed.

26th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning almost, busy about
business against the afternoon, and we met a little to sign two or three
things at the Board of moment, and thence at noon home to dinner, and so
away to White Hall by water.  In my way to the Old Swan, finding a great
many people gathered together in Cannon Street about a man that was
working in the ruins, and the ground did sink under him, and he sunk in,
and was forced to be dug out again, but without hurt.  Thence to White
Hall, and it is strange to say with what speed the people employed do pull
down Paul's steeple, and with what ease: it is said that it, and the choir
are to be taken down this year, and another church begun in the room
thereof, the next.  At White Hall we met at the Treasury chamber, and
there before the Lords did debate our draft of the victualling contract
with the several bidders for it, which were Sir D. Gawden, Mr. Child and
his fellows, and Mr. Dorrington and his, a poor variety in a business of
this value.  There till after candle-lighting, and so home by coach with
Sir D. Gawden, who, by the way, tells me how the City do go on in several
things towards the building of the public places, which I am glad to hear;
and gives hope that in a few years it will be a glorious place; but we met
with several stops and new troubles in the way in the streets, so as makes
it bad to travel in the dark now through the City. So I to Mr. Batelier's
by appointment, where I find my wife, and Deb., and Mercer; Mrs. Pierce
and her husband, son, and daughter; and Knepp and Harris, and W. Batelier,
and his sister Mary, and cozen Gumbleton, a good-humoured, fat young
gentleman, son to the jeweller, that dances well; and here danced all
night long, with a noble supper; and about two in the morning the table
spread again for a noble breakfast beyond all moderation, that put me out
of countenance, so much and so good.  Mrs. Pierce and her people went home
betimes, she being big with child; but Knepp and the rest staid till
almost three in the morning, and then broke up.

27th.  Knepp home with us, and I to bed, and rose about six, mightily
pleased with last night's mirth, and away by water to St. James's, and
there, with Mr. Wren, did correct his copy of my letter, which the Duke of
York hath signed in my very words, without alteration of a syllable.

     [A copy of this letter is in the British Museum, Harl.  MS. 6003.
     See July 24th, ante, and August 29th, Post.  In the Pepysian
     Collection are the following: An Inquisition, by his Royal Highness
     the Duke of York, when Lord High Admiral of England, into the
     Management of the Navy, 1668, with his Regulations thereon, fol.
     Also Mr. Pepys's Defence of the same upon an Inquisition thereunto
     by Parliament, 1669, fol.--B.]

And so pleased therewith, I to my Lord Brouncker, who I find within, but
hath business, and so comes not to the Office to-day.  And so I by water
to the Office, where we sat all the morning; and, just as the Board rises,
comes the Duke of York's letter, which I knowing, and the Board not being
full, and desiring rather to have the Duke of York deliver it himself to
us, I suppressed it for this day, my heart beginning to falsify in this
business, as being doubtful of the trouble it may give me by provoking
them; but, however, I am resolved to go through it, and it is too late to
help it now.  At noon to dinner to Captain Cocke's, where I met with Mr.
Wren; my going being to tell him what I have done, which he likes, and to
confer with Cocke about our Office; who tells me that he is confident the
design of removing our Officers do hold, but that he is sure that I am
safe enough.  Which pleases me, though I do not much shew it to him, but
as a thing indifferent.  So away home, and there met at Sir Richard Ford's
with the Duke of York's Commissioners about our Prizes, with whom we shall
have some trouble before we make an end with them, and hence, staying a
little with them, I with my wife, and W. Batelier, and Deb.; carried them
to Bartholomew Fayre, where we saw the dancing of the ropes and nothing
else, it being late, and so back home to supper and to bed, after having
done at my office.

28th.  Busy at the office till toward 10 o'clock, and then by water to
White Hall, where attending the Council's call all the morning with Lord
Brouncker, W. Pen, and the rest, about the business of supernumeraries in
the fleete, but were not called in.  But here the Duke of York did call me
aside, and told me that he must speak with me in the afternoon, with Mr.
Wren, for that now he hath got the paper from my Lord Keeper about the
exceptions taken against the management of the Navy; and so we are to
debate upon answering them.  At noon I home with W. Coventry to his house;
and there dined with him, and talked freely with him; and did acquaint him
with what I have done, which he is well pleased with, and glad of: and do
tell me that there are endeavours on foot to bring the Navy into new, but,
he fears, worse hands.  After much talk with great content with him, I
walked to the Temple, and staid at Starky's, my bookseller's (looking over
Dr. Heylin's new book of the Life of Bishop Laud, a strange book of the
Church History of his time), till Mr. Wren comes, and by appointment we to
the Atturney General's chamber, and there read and heard the witnesses in
the business of Ackeworth, most troublesome and perplexed by the counter
swearing of the witnesses one against the other, and so with Mr. Wren away
thence to St. [James's] for his papers, and so to White Hall, and after
the Committee was done at the Council chamber about the business of
Supernumeraries, wherein W. Pen was to do all and did, but like an
ignorant illiterate coxcomb, the Duke of York fell to work with us, the
Committee being gone, in the Council-chamber; and there, with his own
hand, did give us his long letter, telling us that he had received several
from us, and now did give us one from him, taking notice of our several
duties and failures, and desired answer to it, as he therein desired; this
pleased me well; and so fell to other business, and then parted.  And the
Duke of York, and Wren, and I, it being now candle-light, into the Duke of
York's closet in White Hall; and there read over this paper of my Lord
Keeper's, wherein are laid down the faults of the Navy, so silly, and the
remedies so ridiculous, or else the same that are now already provided,
that we thought it not to need any answer, the Duke of York being able
himself to do it: that so it makes us admire the confidence of these men
to offer things so silly, in a business of such moment.  But it is a most
perfect instance of the complexion of the times! and so the Duke of York
said himself, who, I perceive, is mightily concerned in it, and do, again
and again, recommend it to Mr. Wren and me together, to consider upon
remedies fit to provide for him to propound to the King, before the rest
of the world, and particularly the Commissioners of Accounts, who are men
of understanding and order, to find our faults, and offer remedies of
their own, which I am glad of, and will endeavour to do something in it.
So parted, and with much difficulty, by candle-light, walked over the
Matted Gallery, as it is now with the mats and boards all taken up, so
that we walked over the rafters.  But strange to see what hard matter the
plaister of Paris is, that is there taken up, as hard as stone!  And pity
to see Holben's work in the ceiling blotted on, and only whited over!
Thence; with much ado, by several coaches home, to supper and to bed.  My
wife having been this day with Hales, to sit for her hand to be mended, in
her picture.

29th.  Up, and all the morning at the Office, where the Duke of York's
long letter was read, to their great trouble, and their suspecting me to
have been the writer of it.  And at noon comes, by appointment, Harris to
dine with me and after dinner he and I to Chyrurgeon's-hall, where they
are building it new, very fine; and there to see their theatre; which
stood all the fire, and, which was our business, their great picture of
Holben's, thinking to have bought it, by the help of Mr. Pierce, for a
little money: I did think to give L200 for it, it being said to be worth
L1000; but it is so spoiled that I have no mind to it, and is not a
pleasant, though a good picture.  Thence carried Harris to his playhouse,
where, though four o'clock, so few people there at "The Impertinents," as
I went out; and do believe they did not act, though there was my Lord
Arlington and his company there.  So I out, and met my wife in a coach,
and stopped her going thither to meet me; and took her, and Mercer, and
Deb., to Bartholomew Fair, and there did see a ridiculous, obscene little
stage-play, called "Marry Andrey;" a foolish thing, but seen by every
body; and so to Jacob Hall's dancing of the ropes; a thing worth seeing,
and mightily followed, and so home and to the office, and then to bed.
Writing to my father to-night not to unfurnish our house in the country
for my sister, who is going to her own house, because I think I may have
occasion myself to come thither; and so I do, by our being put out of the
Office, which do not at all trouble me to think of.

30th (Lord's day).  Walked to St. James's and Pell Mell, and read over,
with Sir W. Coventry, my long letter to the Duke of York, and which the
Duke of York hath, from mine, wrote to the Board, wherein he is mightily
pleased, and I perceive do put great value upon me, and did talk very
openly on all matters of State, and how some people have got the bit into
their mouths, meaning the Duke of Buckingham and his party, and would
likely run away with all.  But what pleased me mightily was to hear the
good character he did give of my Lord Falmouth for his generosity,
good-nature, desire of public good, and low thoughts of his own wisdom;
his employing his interest in the King to do good offices to all people,
without any other fault than the freedom he, do learn in France of
thinking himself obliged to serve his King in his pleasures: and was W.
Coventry's particular friend: and W. Coventry do tell me very odde
circumstances about the fatality of his death, which are very strange.
Thence to White Hall to chapel, and heard the anthem, and did dine with
the Duke of Albemarle in a dirty manner as ever.  All the afternoon, I
sauntered up and down the house and Park.  And there was a Committee for
Tangier met, wherein Lord Middleton would, I think, have found fault with
me for want of coles; but I slighted it, and he made nothing of it, but
was thought to be drunk; and I see that he hath a mind to find fault with
me and Creed, neither of us having yet applied ourselves to him about
anything: but do talk of his profits and perquisites taken from him, and
garrison reduced, and that it must be increased, and such things, as; I
fear, he will be just such another as my Lord Tiviott and the rest, to
ruin that place.  So I to the Park, and there walk an hour or two; and in
the King's garden, and saw the Queen and ladies walk; and I did steal some
apples off the trees; and here did see my Lady Richmond, who is of a noble
person as ever I saw, but her face worse than it was considerably by the
smallpox: her sister' is also very handsome.  Coming into the Park, and
the door kept strictly, I had opportunity of handing in the little,
pretty, squinting girl of the Duke of York's house, but did not make
acquaintance with her; but let her go, and a little girl that was with
her, to walk by themselves.  So to White Hall in the evening, to the
Queen's side, and there met the Duke of York; and he did tell me and W.
Coventry, who was with me, how that Lord Anglesey did take notice of our
reading his long and sharp letter to the Board; but that it was the
better, at least he said so.  The Duke of York, I perceive, is earnest in
it, and will have good effects of it; telling W. Coventry that it was a
letter that might have come from the Commissioners of Accounts, but it was
better it should come first from him.  I met Lord Brouncker, who, I
perceive, and the rest, do smell that it comes from me, but dare not find
fault with it; and I am glad of it, it being my glory and defence that I
did occasion and write it.  So by water home, and did spend the evening
with W. Hewer, telling him how we are all like to be turned out, Lord
Brouncker telling me this evening that the Duke of Buckingham did, within
few hours, say that he had enough to turn us all out which I am not sorry
for at all, for I know the world will judge me to go for company; and my
eyes are such as I am not able to do the business of my Office as I used,
and would desire to do, while I am in it.  So with full content, declaring
all our content in being released of my employment, my wife and I to bed,
and W. Hewer home, and so all to bed.

31st.  Up, and to my office, there to set my journal for all the last
week, and so by water to Westminster to the Exchequer, and thence to the
Swan, and there drank and did baiser la fille there, and so to the New
Exchange and paid for some things, and so to Hercules Pillars,' and there
dined all alone, while I sent my shoe to have the heel fastened at
Wotton's, and thence to White Hall to the Treasury chamber, where did a
little business, and thence to the Duke of York's playhouse and there met
my wife and Deb. and Mary Mercer and Batelier, where also W. Hewer was,
and saw "Hamlet," which we have not seen this year before, or more; and
mightily pleased with it; but, above all, with Betterton, the best part I
believe, that ever man acted.  Thence to the Fayre, and saw
"Polichinelle," and so home, and after a little supper to bed.  This night
lay the first night in Deb.'s chamber, which is now hung with that that
hung our great chamber, and is now a very handsome room.  This day Mrs.
Batelier did give my wife a mighty pretty Spaniel bitch [Flora], which she
values mightily, and is pretty; but as a new comer, I cannot be fond of
her.




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     And the woman so silly, as to let her go that took it
     But what they did, I did not enquire
     Family governed so nobly and neatly as do me good to see it
     I know not whether to be glad or sorry
     My heart beginning to falsify in this business
     Pictures of some Maids of Honor: good, but not like
     Resolved to go through it, and it is too late to help it now
     Saw "Mackbeth," to our great content
     The factious part of the Parliament
     Though I know it will set the Office and me by the ears for ever





End of Project Gutenberg's Diary of Samuel Pepys, August 1668, by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, AUGUST 1668 ***

***** This file should be named 4191.txt or 4191.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/9/4191/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
