The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is Going On
In It, Vol. 1, No. 41, August 19, 1897, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Great Round World and What Is Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 41, August 19, 1897
       A Weekly Magazine for Boys and Girls

Author: Various

Editor: Julia Truitt Bishop

Release Date: May 27, 2005 [EBook #15918]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD AND ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.(www.pgdp.net)






_FIVE CENTS._

THE GREAT ROUND WORLD
AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT

  Vol. 1                AUGUST 19, 1897                No. 41.
[Entered at Post Office, New York City, as second class matter]

[Illustration: A
WEEKLY
NEWSPAPER
FOR
BOYS AND
GIRLS]

Subscription
$2.50 per year
$1.25 6 months


    WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON. PUBLISHER
    NO. 3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST. NEW YORK CITY

=Copyright, 1897, by WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON.=

       *       *       *       *       *

...PREMIUMS...

       *       *       *       *       *

TO ANY ONE SENDING US 4 NEW SUBSCRIBERS

[Illustration: A Pocket Kodak

     Measures 2-1/4 x 2-7/8 x 3-7/8 inches, makes a picture 1-1/2 x 2
     inches, and weighs only 5 ounces. Delivered ready for 12 exposures
     without reloading.]

The Lens is of the fixed focus type, and of sufficient length of focus
(2-1/2 inches) to avoid distortion.

Has improved rotary shutter and set of three stops for lens. The slides
for changing stops and for time exposures are alongside of the exposure
lever and always show by their position what stop is before the lens and
whether the shutter is set for time or instantaneous exposures, thus
acting as a warning.

In the _quality_ of the work they will do, Pocket Kodaks equal the best
cameras on the market. They make negatives of such perfect quality that
enlargements of any size can be made from them.

The Pocket Kodaks are covered with fine leather, and the trimmings are
handsomely finished and lacquered. They are elegant, artistic, and
durable.

=For one more subscription we will send with this camera a bicycle
carrying-case=

       *       *       *       *       *

TO ANY ONE SENDING US 9 NEW SUBSCRIBERS

[Illustration: An Improved
    =No. 4=
   Bulls-Eye

     For pictures 4x5 inches; delivered ready for 12 exposures without
     reloading. Size of camera, 4-7/8 x 5-7/8 x 9-1/4 inches; weight 2
     pounds 2 ounces; length of focus of lens, 6-1/4 inches.]

Fitted with an achromatic lens of superior quality, having a set of
three stops; has two finders, one for vertical and one for horizontal
exposures; and is also provided with two sockets for tripod screws, one
for vertical and one for horizontal exposures. Fitted with improved
rotary shutter, for snap-shots or time exposures. Can be loaded in
daylight. Handsomely finished and covered with leather.

=Both of the above cameras are manufactured by the Eastman Kodak Co.,
Rochester, N.Y., and this is a guarantee of their worth=

                 =THE GREAT ROUND WORLD=
     =3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST.         NEW YORK CITY=

       *       *       *       *       *

                                  at....
                  =SCHOOL BOOKS=  Wholesale
                                  Prices....

            POSTPAID TO ANY ADDRESS

           [Illustration: Divider]

              =SCHOOL BOOKS=

                   TAKEN
                   IN EXCHANGE

           =For Other Books....=
           =For Great Round World=
           =For Cash....=

           [Illustration: Divider]

WHY not dispose of those books that you consider valueless? There are
thousands of boys and girls all over the country who cannot pay the
price of new books and can use those you no longer want.

            =---- SEND A LIST TO---- =

            =WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON=
     =_3 and 5 West 18th Street New York City_=

       *       *       *       *       *

Do you Cover your Books?

    THE "ONE PIECE"
    ADJUSTABLE BOOK COVERS

are made of the strongest and best book-cover paper obtainable. This paper
is made in large quantities especially for these book covers and will
protect books perfectly. The book covers themselves are a marvel of
ingenuity, and, although they are in one piece and can be adjusted to fit
perfectly any sized book without cutting the paper, they are also so
simple that any boy or girl can use them; as they are already gummed they
are always ready for use.

A sample dozen will be mailed to any address for 20 cents (or ten two-cent
stamps) if you write

           WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON
    3 and 5 West 18th Street, New York City

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: THE GREAT ROUND
WORLD
AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT.]

    VOL. 1   AUGUST 19, 1897.   NO. 41

The stories from the Klondike fields seem to grow more wonderful day by
day.

The first accounts have not only been verified, but surpassed by the
later news. Four million dollars' worth of gold is said to be waiting
shipment at St. Michael's, Alaska, and miners at the Klondike say that
fifty millions more will be taken out next season.

Men who went out poor a year ago are now returning with fortunes. Two
miners found $10,000 worth of gold in twenty days.

One man who has just come back bringing $180,000 worth with him gave a
reception at his hotel in San Francisco, and invited all who cared for
the sight to come and see the nuggets he had brought.

It is said to have been the largest exhibit of gold since the famous
times of '49. He had scores of nuggets as large as a man's thumb, but
the feature of the collection was one about the shape and size of a
full-grown potato. This nugget was said to be worth $250. Those who have
seen the Alaska gold say it is very bright, and brassy in color, but not
as fine in quality as the California gold.

The stories of these enormous fortunes have set the Californian and
Northwestern towns in a fever of excitement. A tremendous rush is being
made for the Klondike. Men are leaving good employment and hurrying off
to the gold-fields. Professional men (lawyers and doctors), business
men, merchants, clerks, and laborers are all joining in the mad rush for
the land of gold.

The excitement is as great as it was in '49, but the terrible
experiences of that year have now become ancient history, and the
gold-seekers have to learn the sad lesson anew. It looks as if this land
of gold would, like California in '49, become a land of death.

When the gold fever reached the Eastern States in the spring of '49,
there was just the same mad rush for California that is now being made
for the Klondike.

The emigrants had in those days to cross the prairies in wagons. None of
them understood the rigors of the journey they had to undertake, and
many fell by the wayside and died before the promised land was reached.
After a while the track across this great American desert was marked by
the skeletons of oxen and horses, and boxes and barrels which people had
thrown out of their wagons to lighten the load of their poor weary
beasts, to enable them to reach water and shade. Here and there a rough
mound would mark where some poor soul had been unable to bear the
sufferings and had given up his life.

Thousands died in the awful trip across the continent, and thousands
more, who thought to make an easier journey by sea, died of fevers
contracted in crossing the unhealthy Isthmus of Panama, the strip of
land that divides North and South America, separating the Atlantic from
the Pacific Ocean.

The historian Bancroft says that while between four and five hundred
millions of gold were obtained in the seven years following the find in
'49, the gold cost, in human life and labor, three times what it was
actually worth.

A few of the Forty-niners gained the riches they sought, but the greater
part of the gold-seekers barely made a living by the most exhausting
toil.

[Illustration: FORTY-NINERS CROSSING THE PLAINS.]

As regards the Klondike, all the miners who have returned declare that
the life is so hard that only the very healthy can stand it. In spite of
this warning, weak and delicate men, and men who have lived in luxury
all their lives, are setting their faces toward the north, to undertake
a life of untiring labor and privation, in the intense cold of an Arctic
region in winter, and the most extreme heat in the three short months of
summer.

During this latter season the sun does not set till 10.30, and rises
again at 3 A.M. There is no darkness, midnight being almost as light as
midday. During the hot months all kinds of insects pester the
inhabitants. The horseflies and mosquitoes swarm in such numbers that
the rigors of winter are considered preferable to the warmth of summer.

In addition to the horrors of the climate, there is no real supply of
food obtainable from the Klondike region. There is practically no
farming done, and so no crops to amount to anything are raised.
Practically all the food used at the gold-fields must be carried there
by the miners, and the method of travel is such that it is impossible
for one man to carry all the food he will need until the open season
comes round again, and he can secure fresh provisions.

When the winter once sets in in the Klondike country the people are
completely shut off from the rest of the world, the only way to reach
civilization being by a long and exhausting journey on snowshoes over
mountains and through fearful gorges, through which it would be
impossible to carry baggage. The only communication with the outer world
is through the mail, which reaches the district twice during the winter,
the mail-carriers being mountaineers who understand how to travel these
Arctic mountains over glaciers and snowy peaks.

The returning miners have all told the same story of the journey and the
lack of provisions, but, in spite of this, crowds of men are hurrying
into this country which is already on the verge of famine. Those who
have taken food with them are unable to get it carried to its
destination, and it is said that the road is now blocked with it. The
only means of transportation is by Indians on mule-back; the mules are
very scarce, and the Indians only work when they feel like it. The
chances are that many men will be starving in the Klondike this winter,
while barrels and boxes of food will be piled mountain-high at the last
station, waiting to be carried through the long succession of waterways
and portages. A portage is a place between lakes and rivers where the
waters become so shallow or rapid that they cannot be navigated, and the
boats have to be lifted ashore and carried overland until it is possible
to take to the water again.

[Illustration: CROSSING THE CHILKOOT PASS]

The word Klondike is said to be a mispronunciation of the Indian words
"thron dak" or "duick," which means "plenty of fish," from the fact
that the Klondike is a famous salmon stream. The river is marked
"Tondak" on the Canadian maps.

In the Klondike district are a number of rivers flowing eastward from
the Yukon. In all of these gold has been found. The Stewart River, which
lies south of the Klondike, has been found to be as rich in gold as the
Klondike, and it is confidently asserted that the Alaskan side of this
region is as rich in gold as the British Columbian.

But, so far, all the gold-fields have been located in British Columbia,
and the great rush for them has been from the United States.

The Canadians do not like this, and feel that it is not fair that Canada
should be making nothing out of these fabulous finds.

There is very little redress for her, however. Americans have taken up
the greater part of the claims in the Yukon district, and have been
careful to comply with the very strict laws which Canada has laid down
to govern mining claims. She can therefore make no objections on that
score, but she is determined to get some share of the new riches.

At the present time the Americans are taking their goods into the new
country free of duty, and are making what purchases they need in Alaskan
towns.

Prominent men in Canada are demanding that custom officials shall be
placed at all the Canadian mountain passes.

It is expected that the taxing of the Americans will produce a large
income for the Government. One Canadian firm has offered $50,000 for the
privilege of collecting the customs for ten years.

A cry has gone up that imposing duties on the miners will make their lot
still harder than it is at present, but this will not be heeded. Men who
start out expecting to make a large fortune in a few months ought to be
willing to pay handsomely for the privilege.

Besides establishing custom-houses, the Canadian Government is seriously
discussing the idea of making foreign miners pay a heavy royalty for the
right to work in the mines.

There was some talk of excluding aliens--that is, all who are not
British subjects--from working on the gold-fields, and thus keeping the
Canadian find for Canadians.

You remember the Kootenai matter (see page 850), and how the Canadian
Government made it impossible for aliens to take up claims, and insisted
that all mine owners must give up their citizenship in other countries
and become British subjects. There was some talk of doing the same thing
at Klondike, but it was thought that such a course would make a great
deal of trouble, and that it would be much simpler to force each man to
pay a certain sum of money (fifty dollars a day has been suggested) for
his right to work in the gold-fields.

It is strange how the search for gold brings envy, hatred, malice, and
all uncharitableness in its train.

No sooner was gold discovered than Canada began to fret because America
was profiting by it, and America began to fume because Canada wanted to
make her profit out of the great find.

Ugly threats were made of what the American miners would do if Canada
tried to make things hard for them. In consequence the Secretary of War
has been asked to establish a military post on the route to the
gold-fields in Alaska, to protect the American miners if Canada
interferes unreasonably with them.

       *       *       *       *       *

This seems to be a great year for the finding of gold.

A discovery has just been made in Trinity County, Cal., which leads
people to hope that the mother lode of the Californian gold-fields has
been found.

This main lode had been lost sight of north of El Dorado County, but its
reappearance in Trinity has caused a great deal of excitement and turned
many gold-seekers thither, in preference to the frozen Klondike region.
The first discovery of gold in California was made in what is now El
Dorado County, and it was in consequence of the gold find that the
county got its name.

El Dorado was the name of a mythical king, about whom the most
astonishing stories were told. He was supposed to be lord of a country
where gold was as plentiful as dust. It was in search of these golden
lands that many of the famous discoverers undertook their voyages.

The conquest and settlement of New Granada (now the Republic of
Colombia), the discovery of the Amazon and Orinoco rivers, of the great
forests of the Andes, and of the mountainous regions of Venezuela, were
all due to the quest for El Dorado.

This king, according to the tradition, dwelt in a city called Manoa,
built on a lake called Parima. This city was supposed to be somewhere in
the northern part of South America, and it was confidently asserted that
its streets were paved with gold.

As the story has it, the wealth of this country was so great that the
people wore gold for clothes, it being their custom to smear their
bodies with oil of balsam, and then sprinkle themselves with gold-dust,
till they looked like gilded statues.

To the people of the Old World it seemed that a country which could
afford to dress its inhabitants in this fashion must be well worth
finding, and so the old navigators were always trying to find it.

Of course they never did, but the source of the legend of El Dorado has
been traced to the yearly ceremony of an Indian tribe near Bogota, in
the Republic of Colombia.

The Spaniards declared that it was part of the religious duty of this
tribe to have their chief bathed once a year in a certain lake which was
sacred to them.

Great preparations were made for this ceremony. The body of the chief
was first smeared with gold-dust and oil of balsam, and, a handful of
gold and precious stones was given to him. He then advanced to the
shores of the lake, and amid the prayers and chants of his tribe, first
cast the gold and jewels into the water, and then plunged in himself.

This ceremony was supposed to bring his people good luck for the coming
year.

The Spaniards who conquered New Granada, or the Republic of
Colombia, declared this story to be strictly true, but as none of them
had ever witnessed the ceremony, it is supposed to be merely another
form of the El Dorado legend.

       *       *       *       *       *

In British India there is a fresh uprising which appears to be of a very
serious character.

A body of tribesmen attacked a camp in the Chitral District, killing
some of the British soldiers, and severely wounding others.

Chitral is on the northeast border of India, where it joins Afghanistan.

The tribes in this portion of the Empire have always given the English a
great deal of trouble. They are very bold, and good fighters.

The country they inhabit is very mountainous, and they have one mode of
warfare which makes them a very ugly foe to attack. They throw down
rocks on an invading force, and long practice has made them so expert in
this art that they are most formidable. When once they have taken to
their mountain fastnesses, soldiers do not like the task of pursuing and
punishing them.

The present outbreak was totally unexpected. The Swats, as the people of
this region are called, appeared to be perfectly contented under British
rule. Industry had been encouraged among them, trade developed, and they
seemed a very peaceful and prosperous people.

Suddenly, without any warning, the whole population rose against the
British.

The Swats had intended to attack Camp Malakand unawares, and massacre
the soldiers, but through the kindness of a friendly native a warning
was given. Preparations were quickly made for defence, messengers sent
off to ask for re-enforcements, and the soldiers were able to repulse
the enemy when the attack was made.

Six thousand Swats were said to be in arms against the British.

The Government at once despatched a large force of soldiers to relieve
the little camp.

On their arrival the enemy was soon routed, the cavalry chasing them
back toward the hills. All danger was supposed to be over, when word was
brought that the natives had re-formed, and were preparing to attack a
fort in the neighborhood, called Fort Chakdara.

Leaving a few men at the camp to defend it, the commander of the relief
column started for Chakdara.

They arrived only just in time. The Swats had laid siege to the fort,
and the little garrison in it were despairing, when, from the hills,
they saw the lights flashed by a heliograph, and learned by this means
that help was coming. The heliograph is an instrument for signalling by
means of flashes of light reflected from mirrors.

When the relief party reached Chakdara, they had a severe fight with the
Swats, but they at length routed the tribesmen.

The situation is growing more serious.

       *       *       *       *       *

News has just arrived that Great Britain has taken possession of one of
the smaller islands in the Pacific Ocean, which is claimed by the
Hawaiian Government.

This island is known as Palmyra Island, and is situated about a thousand
miles to the southward of Hawaii. The Hawaiian Government claims that it
is one of the dependencies of the Sandwich Island group.

It was discovered by Captain Cook, the famous navigator who explored the
Pacific Ocean in 1768, and secured Australia and New Zealand for the
British.

It has long been marked on the maps as a British possession, but it
appears that it was occupied years ago by Hawaiians, who raised the
Hawaiian flag over it, and claimed it for their Government.

The action of Great Britain in claiming the island at this time is
considered of the highest importance, as it is feared that it may have
been claimed merely for the sake of complicating Hawaiian matters, and
preventing annexation.

Our Government will look very closely into the rights of the affair, and
insist upon their being respected.

The State Department will gather all information possible in regard to
Palmyra Island. Should it be found that Hawaii's claims are good, our
minister in the Sandwich Islands will be instructed to ask the
Government there to protest against the action of Great Britain. The
United States will then uphold this protest, and the officials believe
that it will result in the removal of the British flag from the island.

An American guano company located on Palmyra Island some years ago,
building sheds and a wharf, but after the guano deposit was exhausted
they abandoned the island. It was at one time known as Americus Island.

       *       *       *       *       *

A despatch from Japan says that the Government has decided to submit the
Hawaiian emigrant question to arbitration.

It is also stated that Japan will endeavor to prevent the annexation by
every means in her power, but that she will not resort to hostile
measures.

The friends of arbitration are very pleased at the news about the
Japanese emigrant question.

Arbitration seems to have been making rapid strides lately. Every one is
satisfied with the settlement of the Venezuelan difficulties, and now
Spain and Peru have entered upon a new treaty based upon similar
grounds.

In this last treaty all differences are to be laid before a
disinterested country for settlement, and the decision of that country
is to be final.

There is a curious clause in this treaty which relates to the frequent
revolutions which occur in the South American republics.

This clause states that the claims of Spanish residents for damage done
their property during these disturbances shall be placed on the same
footing as those of the Peruvians. Formerly there were diplomatic
squabbles and troubles like the Ruiz affair, after every revolution, but
under the new treaty all this will be avoided.

There are still rumors of a new arbitration treaty between England and
the United States. It is probable that the question may be raised again
at the next session of Congress.

       *       *       *       *       *

Affairs are progressing peacefully in Turkey.

The ambassadors have presented the Sultan with a rough draft of the
treaty. It provides that Europe shall arbitrate any difficulties that
may arise between Turkey and Greece over the details of the arrangement.

So far the ambassadors and Turkish officials are on the best of terms,
and meet with the utmost friendliness.

But despite this fact, the peace is not yet concluded.

Germany has made a fresh difficulty by insisting that the Powers shall
control the money matters of Greece until the war indemnity has been
paid.

The Sultan has persisted in his refusal to give up Thessaly until this
money has been paid, and to meet this objection the German Kaiser
proposes to take charge of Greece's pocketbook and see that she settles
her debts.

Greece has something to say on this subject, however. Her ministers will
not hear of any such arrangement, and it was rumored that King George
would abdicate if Germany's plan was carried out.

In addition to this, there is a likelihood of fresh trouble in Crete.

Turkey has been trying to send fresh troops to the island to re-enforce
her present army. The admirals of the allied fleets have sternly
objected to any such proceeding, and, learning that the Turkish troops
are on their way, have refused to allow them to land, threatening to use
force to prevent them, if necessary.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is now openly stated in Havana that General Weyler is to leave Cuba
as soon as it has been definitely settled what leader is to take his
place.

Having failed in all his attempts to pacify the island, General Weyler
was seized with a great idea the other day. He decided to meet Gomez and
discuss the making of peace on the terms of Home Rule for Cuba.

General Weyler has frequently tried to obtain an interview with Gomez,
but has not been successful. Since the killing of Maceo the Cuban
leaders have been very careful how they trusted themselves in the hands
of their treacherous foe.

On this occasion General Weyler sent his messenger to Gomez, with a very
polite request.

Gomez, however, wasted neither time nor politeness over his reply.

"Tell your general," he said to the messenger, "that I do not consider
him a man of honor, and that he has lowered himself too deeply to be on
a level where he can confer with me."

The insurgents are in great numbers around Havana, and are making
constant attacks on the suburbs of that city.

Their force is now so strong that no one can leave the city by land, and
no provisions can be brought into it.

It was decided that an army should be led against the besiegers, and
General Weyler (having been commanded to do so from Madrid) decided to
lead this army himself.

He found himself so hemmed in by insurgents that he was unable to leave
the city except by boat, as all the roads are now in the hands of the
Cubans.

       *       *       *       *       *

The results of the military bicycle trial on Long Island were most
satisfactory.

The company started out with thirty-two men, and arrived home with
twenty-eight, three having been sent back on business, the fourth man
being the only one whose wheel was too badly damaged to be ridden.

The company travelled three hundred and ninety-eight out of the five
hundred miles planned. The rest of the distance could not be made on
account of the dreadful weather.

It rained every day of the trip, and the soldiers had to contend with
muddy roads from start to finish.

In spite of these drawbacks the expedition was a complete success, and
it is said that it will prove of the greatest value from a military
standpoint.

The bicycle ambulance had to be abandoned on the second day out, as it
was unsuited to the heavy roads over which the troop had to travel.

The accidents to the wheels were: ten rims broken, seven tires
punctured, twenty spokes, two bearings, a handle-bar, and a pedal
broken.

Happily there were two bicycle machinists in the party and they were
able to make the necessary repairs, so that all the wheels were usable
throughout the entire trip except one, which was so badly broken that
the rider had to leave the company.

Captain Lyon, who was in command, says that it has been shown that the
bicycle can be of great service in military operations. He says that
under the very worst conditions a wheel can accomplish much more than a
horse.

He thinks that the weight carried on the machine has very little to do
with its endurance, but at the same time in future trips would recommend
that a carbine be carried instead of the musket, which he considers too
heavy and cumbersome to carry on a wheel.

An effort was made to send a despatch by one of the troopers from
Jamaica, L.I., to the camp at Peekskill in seven hours, a distance of
one hundred miles.

Private Walter Dixon was chosen for the service and started out at seven
o'clock in the morning.

He did not reach the State camp till six in the evening, owing to
mishaps. He was thrown from his wheel and stunned during his journey,
and lost a long time while recovering. His actual time in the saddle was
eight hours.

This was considered the most important event of the trip.

In war time the carrying of despatches is one of the most essential
duties, and much depends on the promptness of their delivery. To be able
to send a despatch a hundred miles in eight hours means a revolution in
modern warfare.

The weather and the mosquitoes combined in an effort to make the trip as
difficult as possible. When the men arrived in New York they were tired,
grimy, mud-stained, and punctured with mosquito bites, but very happy
over the success they had had.

They never once sought shelter in hotels, but, rain or no rain, camped
out as they had intended to.

Another trial of the bicycle has been made in the West, and it has again
come off with flying colors.

The Twenty-Fifth United States Infantry Bicycle Corps has just completed
a two-thousand-mile ride from Fort Missoula, Montana, to St. Louis. The
trip took forty days.

The riders and wheels stood the journey remarkably well, and the
lieutenant in command considered the trip a great success.

       *       *       *       *       *

The constant rain that we have had for the last few weeks has called to
mind a very curious old superstition which will amuse and interest you.

There is an ancient English rhyme which runs:

     "St. Swithin's Day, if then doth rain,
      For forty days it will remain;
      St. Swithin's Day, if then be fair,
      For forty days 'twill rain nae mair!"

The history of the origin of this legend has been handed down to us
through the chronicles of William of Malmesbury.

In the early days, before printing was invented, the records were kept
by the monks in the monasteries.

The monks were, indeed, the only people who understood how to read and
write.

The records were written by them on parchment or vellum. The margin of
every sheet was very wide, and beautiful designs were often painted
thereon The first letter of a new paragraph was always beautifully
illuminated, as this method of decoration was called.

These ancient manuscripts have afforded us much of our knowledge of the
world's history.

William of Malmesbury, to whose patient care we are indebted for the
story of St. Swithin, was a monk in the monastery of Malmesbury, a town
in England, about fifty miles from Stratford-on-Avon where Shakespeare
was born. It is situated on the Lower Avon, a branch of the same river
which flows through Stratford.

William was librarian of the monastery of Malmesbury, and was also a
noted historian. He was born in 1095, and died in 1142.

His "History of the English Kings" and "Modern History" have formed the
foundation of the later histories of England that have been written.

William also wrote several other books telling the history of his
church, and it is in one of these that the story of St. Swithin is
found.

In those days the people were very superstitious, and believed in signs
and wonders, and frightened themselves silly with every strange noise or
unusual occurrence, for everything that occurred was supposed to be a
sign that something was going to happen.

According to the record of William of Malmesbury, Swithin was a great
scholar in his day, and was chosen by King Ethelwulf as the tutor of his
son Alfred. This was the Alfred who afterward became Alfred the Great.
He was the king who was scolded by the old woman for burning the cakes.

When Alfred came to the throne he made his old tutor bishop of
Winchester, and Swithin became a very great man indeed.

In spite of his greatness he was a very modest man, and did not care for
pomp or show.

When he died he left strict instructions to the monks of Winchester,
that he was to be buried in a "vile and unworthy place," outside the
monastery.

The monks obeyed his wishes.

The fame and piety of this good man lived after him, and when many years
had passed, and the memory of his dying wishes had grown fainter, the
monks determined to adopt the good Swithin as their patron saint, and
give him a magnificent resting-place inside the cathedral.

Some of the older monks protested, but their objections were overruled,
and a day was set apart for transferring the good man's bones to their
new resting-place.

According to William of Malmesbury this act was performed on July 15th,
and St. Swithin's bones were no sooner lifted from their humble
resting-place than the most awful storm of rain that England had ever
known burst over the country. For forty days it rained without ceasing,
until another flood was feared.

The monks were terribly frightened, and expressed great sorrow for the
mischief they had done, but they did not give up their prize. The bones
of St. Swithin were kept in Winchester Cathedral, rain or no rain.

Ever since then, according to the same chronicler, if it rained on the
15th of July, or St. Swithin's day, it was sure to rain every day for
forty days.

       *       *       *       *       *

A new postal regulation has just come into use.

It is at present only in force in thirty-six of our principal cities,
but if found to be as satisfactory as it is expected to be, will be used
all over the country where there is a free delivery of mail.

This new plan provides for a house-to-house collection, as well as
delivery of mail, and also for the sale of stamps by letter-carriers.

This is accomplished through the use of a combination letter-box, with
which each householder is supposed to supply himself.

The box is to be placed where the postman can easily have access to it
without whistling or ringing bells. Instead he will unlock the mail-box,
take from it all the letters that want mailing, and put in their place
those which he has to deliver.

It will be a very pleasant thing to be able to post letters without
going off our own doorsteps, but this is only half of the comfort which
the new box is going to be to us.

In each post-box will be a special envelope containing blanks, on which
the householder can order one and two cent stamps and postal-cards,
putting the money to pay for them into the envelope with his order.

The postman collects this envelope with the regular mail, and hands it
to a special clerk, who takes out the money, fills the order, and drops
the envelope in the mail for the postman to deliver on his next round.

Unstamped letters can also be posted in this very delightful box, and
special delivery stamps can be secured by stating on the blank the
number of letters that are to be stamped, and enclosing the money for
the same in the special envelope.

All unstamped matter is turned over to the clerk who has charge of the
envelope department. He buys the stamps, sticks them on, and despatches
the letters.

This service is only rendered to people who buy their own boxes.

The post-office does not undertake to furnish them, but only to give
good service with them when they are purchased.

       *       *       *       *       *

A wonderful feat of swimming has just been performed in England.

A man named McNally, a champion swimmer, and a native of Boston, Mass.,
has attempted to swim across the English Channel from Dover, England,
to Calais, France, a distance of thirty-five miles.

This body of water is the most uncertain and the roughest of seas.

Many people who are fine sailors and have made many voyages to Europe
say they would rather cross the Atlantic than the English Channel.

The reason for this is that the vast body of water which forms the North
Sea, in forcing its way between the narrow straits of Dover, is driven
into short cross-waves and currents, which make the sea always choppy
and rough.

Many swimmers have made the attempt to swim this Channel before, among
them Boyton, and Captain Webb who lost his life in an attempt to swim
the Niagara Rapids.

No one has so far achieved success.

McNally succeeded in reaching within three miles of the French coast,
but he was then so exhausted that he had to be pulled into the boat and
give up the attempt.

He had announced that he would swim the Channel, and had been some days
in Dover, swimming over a part of the course, and getting himself in
training for the final effort.

He started from the Dover pier, followed by a row-boat in which were two
sailors, a newspaper man, and his trainer.

When he started out he had no intention of taking the swim. He merely
went out for exercise. The weather was so foggy that his companions
urged him to turn back and exercise later in the day.

He, however, kept on, and when he was about six miles from the shore
the fog lifted, and wind and tide all being in his favor, he determined
to make the trial then and there.

He was in the water fifteen and a half hours, and swam steadily all the
time at the rate of about a mile and a half an hour.

Swimmers will be interested to know that McNally used the breast stroke
continually, only occasionally changing to a side stroke for relief.

He never swam on his back. He says that this method of swimming
interferes with the muscles, and gets them out of condition for resuming
the breast stroke.

Swimmers as a rule seek rest and relief by turning on their backs, so
the opinion of an expert on such a subject is well worth having.

Apart from the interest we all feel in great feats of strength and
endurance, such an attempt as that made by McNally is valuable to us, as
it shows us the length of time it is possible for a swimmer to remain in
the water without becoming exhausted.

Swimming is an accomplishment that every boy and girl should acquire,
and the knowledge that if a swimmer keeps cool, and has his wits about
him, he can remain in the water for a considerable period without danger
of drowning, should be taken to heart by every lad and lass who
contemplates boating as a part of the summer's enjoyment.

                                              G.H. ROSENFELD.




INVENTION AND DISCOVERY


FRUIT-PICKER.--Fruit-picking is such an easy matter for boys that I
think it is the girls who will chiefly appreciate this contrivance. It
too often happens that there will be a very tall tree with fruit well
out of reach, and a girl at the foot of it who is not an expert climber.
Her mouth need no longer water in vain. This fruit-picker is very
ingenious. It consists of scoop-shaped jaws worked by cords and springs,
and mounted on a pole of suitable length. Attached to the jaws is a
long, funnel-shaped bag, which receives the fruit and allows it to drop
without injury right into the fruit-picker's hands.

[Illustration: Fruit Picker]

[Illustration: Safety-Brake]

SAFETY-BRAKE FOR CHILDREN'S CARRIAGES.--So many accidents occur with
baby-carriages that this ought to be a great comfort to mothers, and a
great help to the "little mothers" who mind the babies. Children's
carriages are made so light that their weight is very slight, and a puff
of wind is often enough to set them in motion; and if they chance to be
on an uneven sidewalk they are likely to roll into the road among the
vehicles. This simple brake, which keeps the wheels from moving when the
handle is released, will render this impossible, and make it safe to
leave the carriage, baby and all, without the fear of harm coming to it.

It seems as if the danger to the children attracted the attention of
more than one person at the same time, for other brakes also have been
brought to our notice, the same in intention, but differing in design.

[Illustration: Garment Hanger and Stretcher]

GARMENT HANGER AND STRETCHER.--This is a very simple and ingenious
arrangement to combine a garment hanger and stretcher. The two are made
in one, and consist of a single piece of wire bent backward on itself.
The ends are secured to a support which can be attached to the wall, and
at the other end of the double wire it is bent upward and downward, so
as to form a strong spring holding the two parallel parts closely
together.

[Illustration: Combination Eraser]

COMBINATION ERASER.--The combination eraser is a handy little tool, and
seems calculated to find its way to every writing-table. As its name
implies, we find combined in the one tool an eraser, a blade, and a
smoothing-tip fitted in the stem of the blade. Besides this, a brush can
be at will secured to an extension of the tip, thus bringing together
all the implements necessary for erasing.

[Illustration: Corn-Holder]

CORN-HOLDER.--Corn is never so sweet as when it is eaten off the cob,
and in spite of burned and greasy fingers too, most people prefer to
enjoy it in that way. This corn-holder will enable one to so enjoy it
without any such drawbacks. It consists of a pair of lever-arms which
work like scissors or shears. One end of each curves inwardly and has a
pointed end which will enter the corn. There is a chain below which will
keep them fixed in the necessary position for firmly holding it.




CORRESPONDENCE.


     MR. WILLIAM B. HARISON.

     DEAR SIR: Pardon me for calling your attention to an error
     in your valuable paper, THE GREAT ROUND WORLD, which has
     many friends here. On page 1,036 you speak of the steamer
     _Pewabic_ on Lake Michigan. This should read Lake Huron. The
     wreck lays about twenty miles from Alpena. Some of the
     readers thought this should be corrected. Hence I take the
     liberty of this letter.

     Wishing you best success for the paper, I remain

                                       Yours truly,
                                      H.H. WITTELSHOFER.
     ALPENA, MICH., July 19th, 1897.


DEAR SIR:

We acknowledge the receipt of your letter, with many thanks, and are
much obliged to you for calling our attention to the matter.   EDITOR.

       *       *       *       *       *

        _To Any Subscriber Securing_

             For Us =1= _NEW_
                        _SUBSCRIPTION_

              _We Will Send, Post-Paid,
                A BOUND VOLUME OF ..._

               =THE GREAT ROUND WORLD=

     _These volumes are neatly bound in cloth, with title stamped
     on side and back, and make a neat library book, handy in
     size and weight, and tasteful in appearance._

    =PART I.= _contains_
       =NOVEMBER 11th, 1896 to FEBRUARY 18th, 1897=

    =PART II.= _contains_
       =FEBRUARY 25th, 1897 to JUNE 3d, 1897=

     ALBERT ROSS PARSONS, _President, American College of
     Musicians,_ writes concerning his son, aged 10: "The bound
     volume of the first fifteen numbers has remained his daily
     mental food and amusement ever since it arrived. I thank you
     for your great service both to our young people and to their
     elders."

       *       *       *       *       *

                            =THE GREAT ROUND WORLD=
                =3 & 5 WEST 18TH STREET       NEW YORK CITY=

       *       *       *       *       *

Remember that text-books will
be taken in exchange for subscriptions
to

                 =THE= .. ..
              =GREAT ROUND WORLD=

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Second Bound Volume=

OF

=THE GREAT ROUND WORLD=

(Containing Nos. 16 to 30)

=IS NOW READY=


     Handsomely bound in strong cloth, with title on side and back.
     Price, postage paid, $1.25. Subscribers may exchange their numbers
     by sending them to us (express paid) with 35 cents to cover cost of
     binding, and 10 cents for return carriage.

  Address
=_3 and 5 West 18th Street, . . . . . . New York City_=

       *       *       *       *       *

TO ANY ONE SENDING US


   =8= _NEW...._
       _SUBSCRIBERS_

     WE WILL SEND A

                               =JUNIOR RIFLE=

     22 calibre, highly finished, with rebounding lock, case-hardened
     frame, detachable barrel, automatic shell ejector. Weight 4-1/2
     pounds.

[Illustration: Rifle]

                                      OR


                               =A "Shattuck New=
                               =Model" Shot=Gun=


     Side-snap action, rebounding lock, walnut pistol-grip stock, patent
     fore end, rubber butt, and pistol-grip cap, nickel frame,
     choke-bored, twist-steel barrel. 12 or 16 gauge.

                =THE GREAT ROUND WORLD=
     3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST.          NEW YORK CITY

       *       *       *       *       *

="The Great Round World" PRIZE CONTEST=

THE GREAT ROUND WORLD is now over six months old, and it feels some
anxiety to know just how much interest its readers have taken in the
news and how much information they have gained from its pages. To
ascertain this, it has been decided to offer ten prizes for the best
answers to the following:

     =Name ten of the most important events that have been mentioned in
     "The Great Round World" in the first 30 numbers, that is, up to
     number of June 3d.=

     _In mentioning these events give briefly reasons for considering
     them important._

This competition will be open to subscribers only, and any one desiring
to enter the competition must send to this office their name and the
date of their subscription; a number will then be given them.

All new subscribers will be furnished with a card entitling them to
enter the competition.

In making the selection of important events, remember that wars and
political events are not necessarily the most important. If, for
instance, the air-ship had turned out to be a genuine and successful
thing, it would have been most important as affecting the history of the
world. Or if by chance the telephone or telegraph had been invented in
this period, these inventions would have been _important_ events.

Prizes will be awarded to those who make the best selection and who
mention the events in the best order of their importance. Answers may be
sent in any time before September 1st.

The Great Round World does not want you to hurry over this contest, but
to take plenty of time and do the work carefully. It will be a pleasant
occupation for the summer months.

We would advise you to take the magazines starting at No. 1, look them
over carefully, keep a note-book at your side, and jot down in it the
events that seem to you important; when you have finished them all, No.
1 to 30, look over your notes and select the ten events that seem to you
to be the most important, stating after each event your reason for
thinking it important.

For instance: suppose you decide that the death of Dr. Ruiz was one of
these important events, you might say, "The killing of Dr. Ruiz in the
prison of Guanabacoa--because it brought the cruelties practised on
American citizens to the attention of our Government," etc., etc.

In sending your answers put your number and the date only on them, for
the judges are not to know names and addresses of the contestants, that
there may be no favoritism shown.

It is important to put date on, for if two or more are found of similar
standing, the one first received will be given preference.

Address all letters to REVIEW PRIZE CONTEST DEPARTMENT,
GREAT ROUND WORLD, 3 and 5 West 18th Street, New York City.

          _Write answer on one side of the paper only_
     =Prizes will be selections from the premium catalogue=

         No. 1. Premiums as given for 15 Subscriptions
         No. 2.    "      "   "    "  12        "
         No. 3.    "      "   "    "  10        "
         No. 4.    "      "   "    "   9        "
         No. 5.    "      "   "    "   8        "
         No. 6.    "      "   "    "   7        "
         No. 7.    "      "   "    "   5        "
         No. 8.    "      "   "    "   5        "
         No. 9.    "      "   "    "   5        "
         No. 10.   "      "   "    "   5        "





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is
Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 41, August 19, 1897, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD AND ***

***** This file should be named 15918.txt or 15918.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/5/9/1/15918/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.(www.pgdp.net)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

