The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Temptation of Samuel Burge, by W.W. Jacobs

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Temptation of Samuel Burge
       Captains All, Book 8.

Author: W.W. Jacobs

Release Date: February 20, 2004 [EBook #11188]

Language: English

Character set encoding: US-ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TEMPTATION OF SAMUEL BURGE ***




Produced by David Widger




CAPTAINS ALL

By W.W. Jacobs



THE TEMPTATION OF SAMUEL BURGE

[Illustration: "The Temptation of Samuel Burge."]

Mr. Higgs, jeweller, sat in the small parlour behind his shop, gazing
hungrily at a supper-table which had been laid some time before.  It was
a quarter to ten by the small town clock on the mantelpiece, and the
jeweller rubbing his hands over the fire tried in vain to remember what
etiquette had to say about starting a meal before the arrival of an
expected guest.

"He must be coming by the last train after all, sir," said the
housekeeper entering the room and glancing at the clock.  "I suppose
these London gentlemen keep such late hours they don't understand us
country folk wanting to get to bed in decent time.  You must be wanting
your supper, sir."

Mr. Higgs sighed.  "I shall be glad of my supper," he said slowly, "but I
dare say our friend is hungrier still.  Travelling is hungry work."

"Perhaps he is thinking over his words for the seventh day," said the
housekeeper solemnly.  "Forgetting hunger and thirst and all our poor
earthly feelings in the blessedness of his work."

"Perhaps so," assented the other, whose own earthly feelings were
particularly strong just at that moment.

"Brother Simpson used to forget all about meal-times when he stayed
here," said the housekeeper, clasping her hands.  "He used to sit by the
window with his eyes half-closed and shake his head at the smell from the
kitchen and call it flesh-pots of Egypt.  He said that if it wasn't for
keeping up his strength for the work, luscious bread and fair water was
all he wanted.  I expect Brother Burge will be a similar sort of man."

"Brother Clark wrote and told me that he only lives for the work," said
the jeweller, with another glance at the clock.  "The chapel at
Clerkenwell is crowded to hear him.  It's a blessed favour and privilege
to have such a selected instrument staying in the house.  I'm curious to
see him; from what Brother Clark said I rather fancy that he was a little
bit wild in his younger days."

"Hallelujah!" exclaimed the housekeeper with fervour.  "I mean to think
as he's seen the error of his ways," she added sharply, as her master
looked up.

"There he is," said the latter, as the bell rang.

The housekeeper went to the side-door, and drawing back the bolt admitted
the gentleman whose preaching had done so much for the small but select
sect known as the Seventh Day Primitive Apostles.  She came back into the
room followed by a tall stout man, whose upper lip and short stubby beard
streaked with grey seemed a poor match for the beady eyes which lurked
behind a pair of clumsy spectacles.

"Brother Samuel Burge?" inquired the jeweller, rising.

The visitor nodded, and regarding him with a smile charged with fraternal
love, took his hand in a huge grip and shook it fervently.

"I am glad to see you, Brother Higgs," he said, regarding him fondly.
"Oh, 'ow my eyes have yearned to be set upon you!  Oh, 'ow my ears 'ave
longed to hearken unto the words of your voice!"

He breathed thickly, and taking a seat sat with his hands upon his knees,
looking at a fine piece of cold beef which the housekeeper had just
placed upon the table.

"Is Brother Clark well?" inquired the jeweller, placing a chair for him
at the table and taking up his carving-knife.

"Dear Brother Clark is in excellent 'ealth, I thank you," said the other,
taking the proffered chair.  "Oh! what a man he is; what a instrument for
good.  Always stretching out them blessed hands of 'is to make one of the
fallen a Seventh Day Primitive."

"And success attends his efforts?" said the jeweller.

"Success, Brother!" repeated Mr. Burge, eating rapidly and gesticulating
with his knife.  "Success ain't no name for it.  Why, since this day last
week he has saved three pick-pockets, two Salvationists, one bigamist and
a Roman Catholic."

Brother Higgs murmured his admiration.  "You are also a power for good,"
he said wistfully.  "Brother Clark tells me in his letter that your
exhortations have been abundantly blessed."

Mr. Burge shook his head.  "A lot of it falls by the wayside," he said
modestly, "but some of it is an eye-opener to them as don't entirely shut
their ears.  Only the day before yesterday I 'ad two jemmies and a dark
lantern sent me with a letter saying as 'ow the owner had no further use
for 'em."

The jeweller's eyes glistened with admiration not quite untinged with
envy.  "Have you expounded the Word for long?" he inquired.

"Six months," replied the other.  "It come to me quite natural--I was on
the penitent bench on the Saturday, and the Wednesday afterwards I
preached as good a sermon as ever I've preached in my life.  Brother
Clark said it took 'is breath away."

"And he's a judge too," said the admiring jeweller.

"Now," continued Brother Burge, helping himself plentifully to pickled
walnuts.  "Now there ain't standing room in our Bethel when I'm
expounding.  People come to hear me from all parts--old and young--rich
and poor--and the Apostles that don't come early 'ave to stand outside
and catch the crumbs I throw 'em through the winders."

"It is enough," sighed Brother Higgs, whose own audience was frequently
content to be on the wrong side of the window, "it is enough to make a
man vain."

"I struggle against it, Brother," said Mr. Burge, passing his cup up for
some more tea.  "I fight against it hard, but once the Evil One was
almost too much for me; and in spite of myself, and knowing besides that
it was a plot of 'is, I nearly felt uplifted."

Brother Higgs, passing him some more beef, pressed for details.

"He sent me two policemen," replied the other, scowling darkly at the
meanness of the trick.  "One I might 'ave stood, but two come to being
pretty near too much for me.  They sat under me while I gave 'em the Word
'ot and strong, and the feeling I had standing up there and telling
policemen what they ought to do I shall never forget."

"But why should policemen make you proud?" asked his puzzled listener.

Mr. Burge looked puzzled in his turn.  "Why, hasn't Brother Clark told
you about me?" he inquired.

Mr. Higgs shook his head.  "He sort of--suggested that--that you had been
a little bit wild before you came to us," he murmured apologetically.

"A--little--bit--wild?" repeated Brother Burge, in horrified accents.
"ME? a little bit wild?"

"No doubt he exaggerated a little," said the jeweller hurriedly.  "Being
such a good man himself, no doubt things would seem wild to him that
wouldn't to us--to me, I mean."

"A little bit wild," said his visitor again.  "Sam Burge, the Converted
Burglar, a little bit wild.  Well, well!"

"Converted what?" shouted the jeweller, half-rising from his chair.

"Burglar," said the other shortly.  "Why, I should think I know more
about the inside o' gaols than anybody in England; I've pretty near
killed three policemen, besides breaking a gent's leg and throwing a
footman out of window, and then Brother Clark goes and says I've been a
little bit wild.  I wonder what he would 'ave?"

"But you--you've quite reformed now?" said the jeweller, resuming his
seat and making a great effort to hide his consternation.

"I 'ope so," said Mr. Burge, with alarming humility; "but it's an
uncertain world, and far be it from me to boast.  That's why I've come
here."

Mr. Higgs, only half-comprehending, sat back gasping.

"If I can stand this," pursued Brother Burge, gesticulating wildly in the
direction of the shop, "if I can stand being here with all these 'ere
pretty little things to be 'ad for the trouble of picking of 'em up, I
can stand anything.  Tempt me, I says to Brother Clark.  Put me in the
way o' temptation, I says.  Let me see whether the Evil One or me is the
strongest; let me 'ave a good old up and down with the Powers o'
Darkness, and see who wins."

Mr. Higgs, gripping the edge of the table with both hands, gazed at this
new Michael in speechless consternation.

"I think I see his face now," said Brother Burge, with tender enthusiasm.
"All in a glow it was, and he patted me on the shoulder and says, 'I'll
send you on a week's mission to Duncombe,' he says, and 'you shall stop
with Brother Higgs who 'as a shop full o' cunning wrought vanities in
silver and gold.'"

"But suppose," said the jeweller, finding his voice by a great effort,
"suppose victory is not given unto you."

"It won't make any difference," replied his visitor.  "Brother Clark
promised that it shouldn't.  'If you fall, Brother,' he says, 'we'll help
you up again.  When you are tired of sin come back to us--there's always
a welcome.'"

"But--" began the dismayed jeweller.

"We can only do our best," said Brother Burge, "the rest we must leave.
I 'ave girded my loins for the fray, and taken much spiritual sustenance
on the way down from this little hymn-book."

Mr. Higgs paid no heed.  He sat marvelling over the fatuousness of
Brother Clark and trying to think of ways and means out of the dilemma
into which that gentleman's perverted enthusiasm had placed him.  He
wondered whether it would be possible to induce Brother Burge to sleep
elsewhere by offering to bear his hotel expenses, and at last, after some
hesitation, broached the subject.

"What!" exclaimed the other, pushing his plate from him and regarding him
with great severity.  "Go and sleep at a hotel?  After Brother Clark has
been and took all this trouble?  Why, I wouldn't think of doing such a
thing."

"Brother Clark has no right to expose you to such a trial," said Mr.
Higgs with great warmth.

"I wonder what he'd say if he 'eard you," remarked Mr. Burge sternly.
"After his going and making all these arrangements, for you to try and go
and upset 'em.  To ask me to shun the fight like a coward; to ask me to
go and hide in the rear-ranks in a hotel with everything locked up, or a
Coffer Pallis with nothing to steal."

"I should sleep far more comfortably if I knew that you were not
undergoing this tremendous strain," said the unhappy Mr. Higgs, "and
besides that, if you did give way, it would be a serious business for me
--that's what I want you to look at.  I am afraid that if--if unhappily
you did fall, I couldn't prevent you."

"I'm sure you couldn't," said the other cordially.  "That's the beauty of
it; that's when the Evil One's whispers get louder and louder.  Why, I
could choke you between my finger and thumb.  If unfortunately my fallen
nature should be too strong for me, don't interfere whatever you do.  I
mightn't be myself."

Mr. Higgs rose and faced him gasping.

"Not even--call for--the police--I suppose," he jerked out.

"That would be interfering," said Brother Burge coldly.

The jeweller tried to think.  It was past eleven.  The housekeeper had
gone to spend the night with an ailing sister, and a furtive glance at
Brother Burge's small shifty eyes and fat unwholesome face was sufficient
to deter him from leaving him alone with his property, while he went to
ask the police to give an eye to his house for the night.  Besides, it
was more than probable that Mr. Burge would decline to allow such a
proceeding.  With a growing sense of his peril he resolved to try
flattery.

"It was a great thing for the Brethren to secure a man like you," he
said.

"I never thought they'd ha' done it," said Mr. Burge frankly.  "I've 'ad
all sorts trying to convert me; crying over me and praying over me.  I
remember the first dear good man that called me a lorst lamb.  He didn't
say anything else for a month."

"So upset," hazarded the jeweller.

"I broke his jor, pore feller," said Brother Burge, a sad but withal
indulgent smile lighting up his face at the vagaries of his former
career.  "What time do you go to bed, Brother?"

"Any time," said the other reluctantly.  "I suppose you are tired with
your journey?"

Mr. Burge assented, and rising from his chair yawned loudly and stretched
himself.  In the small room with his huge arms raised he looked colossal.

"I suppose," said the jeweller, still seeking to re-assure himself, "I
suppose dear Brother Clark felt pretty certain of you, else he wouldn't
have sent you here?"

"Brother Clark said 'What is a jeweller's shop compared with a 'uman
soul, a priceless 'uman soul?'" replied Mr. Burge.  "What is a few
gew-gaws to decorate them that perish, and make them vain, when you come
to consider the opportunity of such a trial, and the good it'll do and
the draw it'll be--if I do win--and testify to the congregation to that
effect?  Why, there's sermons for a lifetime in it."

"So there is," said the jeweller, trying to look cheerful.  "You've got a
good face, Brother Burge, and you'll do a lot of good by your preaching.
There is honesty written in every feature."

Mr. Burge turned and surveyed himself in the small pier-glass.  "Yes," he
said, somewhat discontentedly, "I don't look enough like a burglar to
suit some of 'em."

"Some people are hard to please," said the other warmly.

Mr. Burge started and eyed him thoughtfully, and then as Mr. Higgs after
some hesitation walked into the shop to turn the gas out, stood in the
doorway watching him.  A smothered sigh as he glanced round the shop bore
witness to the state of his feelings.

The jeweller hesitated again in the parlour, and then handing Brother
Burge his candle turned out the gas, and led the way slowly upstairs to
the room which had been prepared for the honoured visitor.  He shook
hands at the door and bade him an effusive good-night, his voice
trembling despite himself as he expressed a hope that Mr. Burge would
sleep well.  He added casually that he himself was a very light sleeper.

To-night sleep of any kind was impossible.  He had given up the front
room to his guest, and his own window looked out on an over-grown garden.
He sat trying to read, with his ears alert for the slightest sound.
Brother Burge seemed to be a long time undressing.  For half an hour
after he had retired he could hear him moving restlessly about his room.

Twelve o'clock struck from the tower of the parish church, and was
followed almost directly by the tall clock standing in the hall
down-stairs.  Scarcely had the sounds died away than a low moaning from
the next room caused the affrighted jeweller to start from his chair and
place his ear against the wall.  Two or three hollow groans came through
the plaster, followed by ejaculations which showed clearly that Brother
Burge was at that moment engaged in a terrified combat with the Powers
of Darkness to decide whether he should, or should not, rifle his host's
shop.  His hands clenched and his ear pressed close to the wall, the
jeweller listened to a monologue which increased in interest with every
word.

"I tell you I won't," said the voice in the next room with a groan, "I
won't.  Get thee behind me--Get thee--No, and don't shove me over to the
door; if you can't get behind me without doing that, stay where you are.
Yes, I know it's a fortune as well as what you do; but it ain't mine."

The listener caught his breath painfully.

"Diamond rings," continued Brother Burge in a suffocating voice.  "Stop
it, I tell you.  No, I won't just go and look at 'em."

A series of groans which the jeweller noticed to his horror got weaker
and weaker testified to the greatness of the temptation.  He heard
Brother Burge rise, and then a succession of panting snarls seemed to
indicate a fierce bodily encounter.

"I don't--want to look at 'em," said Brother Burge in an exhausted voice.
"What's--the good of--looking at 'em?  It's like you, you know diamonds
are my weakness.  What does it matter if he is asleep?  What's my knife
got to do with you?"

Brother Higgs reeled back and a mist passed before his eyes.  He came to
himself at the sound of a door opening, and impelled with a vague idea of
defending his property, snatched up his candle and looked out on to the
landing.

The light fell on Brother Burge, fully dressed and holding his boots in
his hand.  For a moment they gazed at each other in silence; then the
jeweller found his voice.

"I thought you were ill, Brother," he faltered.

An ugly scowl lit up the other's features.  "Don't you tell me any of
your lies," he said fiercely.  "You're watching me; that's what you're
doing.  Spying on me."

"I thought that you were being tempted," confessed the trembling Mr.
Higgs.

An expression of satisfaction which he strove to suppress appeared on Mr.
Burge's face.

"So I was," he said sternly.  "So I was; but that's my business.  I don't
want your assistance; I can fight my own battles.  You go to bed--I'm
going to tell the congregation I won the fight single-'anded."

"So you have, Brother," said the other eagerly; "but it's doing me good
to see it.  It's a lesson to me; a lesson to all of us the way you
wrestled."

"I thought you was asleep," growled Brother Burge, turning back to his
room and speaking over his shoulder.  "You get back to bed; the fight
ain't half over yet.  Get back to bed and keep quiet."

The door closed behind him, and Mr. Higgs, still trembling, regained his
room and looked in agony at the clock.  It was only half-past twelve and
the sun did not rise until six.  He sat and shivered until a second
instalment of groans in the next room brought him in desperation to his
feet.

Brother Burge was in the toils again, and the jeweller despite his fears
could not help realizing what a sensation the story of his temptation
would create.  Brother Burge was now going round and round his room like
an animal in a cage, and sounds as of a soul wrought almost beyond
endurance smote upon the listener's quivering ear.  Then there was a long
silence more alarming even than the noise of the conflict.  Had Brother
Burge won, and was he now sleeping the sleep of the righteous, or----
Mr. Higgs shivered and put his other ear to the wall.  Then he heard his
guest move stealthily across the floor; the boards creaked and the handle
of the door turned.

Mr. Higgs started, and with a sudden flash of courage born of anger and
desperation seized a small brass poker from the fire-place, and taking
the candle in his other hand went out on to the landing again.  Brother
Burge was closing his door softly, and his face when he turned it upon
the jeweller was terrible in its wrath.  His small eyes snapped with
fury, and his huge hands opened and shut convulsively.

"What, agin!" he said in a low growl.  "After all I told you!"

Mr. Higgs backed slowly as he advanced.

"No noise," said Mr. Burge in a dreadful whisper.  "One scream and I'll--
What were you going to do with that poker?"

He took a stealthy step forward.

"I--I," began the jeweller.  His voice failed him.  "Burglars," he
mouthed, "downstairs."

"What?" said the other, pausing.

Mr. Higgs threw truth to the winds. "I heard them in the shop," he said,
recovering, "that's why I took up the poker.  Can't you hear them?"

Mr. Burge listened for the fraction of a second.  "Nonsense," he said
huskily.

"I heard them talking," said the other recklessly.  "Let's go down and
call the police."

"Call 'em from the winder," said Brother Burge, backing with some haste,
"they might 'ave pistols or something, and they're ugly customers when
they're disturbed."

He stood with strained face listening.

"Here they come," whispered the jeweller with a sudden movement of alarm.

Brother Burge turned, and bolting into his room clapped the door to and
locked it.  The jeweller stood dumbfounded on the landing; then he heard
the window go up and the voice of Brother Burge, much strengthened by the
religious exercises of the past six months, bellowing lustily for the
police.

For a few seconds Mr. Higgs stood listening and wondering what
explanation he should give.  Still thinking, he ran downstairs, and,
throwing open the pantry window, unlocked the door leading into the shop
and scattered a few of his cherished possessions about the floor.  By the
time he had done this, people were already beating upon the street-door
and exchanging hurried remarks with Mr. Burge at the window above.  The
jeweller shot back the bolts, and half-a-dozen neighbours, headed by the
butcher opposite, clad in his nightgown and armed with a cleaver, burst
into the passage.  A constable came running up just as the pallid face of
Brother Burge peered over the balusters.  The constable went upstairs
three at a time, and twisting his hand in the ex-burglar's neck-cloth
bore him backwards.

"I've got one," he shouted.  "Come up and hold him while I look round."

The butcher was beside him in a moment; Brother Burge struggling wildly,
called loudly upon the name of Brother Higgs.

"That's all right, constable," said the latter, "that's a friend of
mine."

"Friend o' yours, sir?" said the disappointed officer, still holding him.

The jeweller nodded.  "Mr. Samuel Burge the Converted Burglar," he said
mechanically.

"Conver----" gasped the astonished constable.  "Converted burglar?
Here!"

"He is a preacher now," added Mr. Higgs.

"Preacher?" retorted the constable.  "Why it's as plain as a pikestaff.
Confederates: his part was to go down and let 'em in."

Mr. Burge raised a piteous outcry.  "I hope you may be forgiven for them
words," he cried piously.

"What time did you go up to bed?" pursued the constable.

"About half-past eleven," replied Mr. Higgs.

The other grunted with satisfaction.  "And he's fully dressed, with his
boots off," he remarked.  "Did you hear him go out of his room at all?"

"He did go out," said the jeweller truth-fully, "but----"

"I thought so," said the constable, turning to his prisoner with
affectionate solicitude.  "Now you come along o' me.  Come quietly,
because it'll be the best for you in the end."

"You won't get your skull split open then," added the butcher, toying
with his cleaver.

The jeweller hesitated.  He had no desire to be left alone with Mr. Burge
again; and a sense of humour, which many years' association with the
Primitive Apostles had not quite eradicated, strove for hearing.

"Think of the sermon it'll make," he said encouragingly to the frantic
Mr. Burge, "think of the congregation!"

Brother Burge replied in language which he had not used in public since
he had joined the Apostles.  The butcher and another man stood guard over
him while the constable searched the premises and made all secure again.
Then with a final appeal to Mr. Higgs who was keeping in the background,
he was pitched to the police-station by the energetic constable and five
zealous assistants.

A diffidence, natural in the circumstances, prevented him from narrating
the story of his temptation to the magistrates next morning, and Mr.
Higgs was equally reticent.  He was put back while the police
communicated with London, and in the meantime Brother Clark and a band
of Apostles flanked down to his support.

On his second appearance before the magistrates he was confronted with
his past; and his past to the great astonishment of the Brethren being
free from all blemish with the solitary exception of fourteen days for
stealing milk-cans, he was discharged with a caution.  The disillusioned
Primitive Apostles also gave him his freedom.






End of Project Gutenberg's The Temptation of Samuel Burge, by W.W. Jacobs

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TEMPTATION OF SAMUEL BURGE ***

***** This file should be named 11188.txt or 11188.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/1/1/8/11188/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


