The Project Gutenberg EBook of El Verdugo, by Honore de Balzac

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: El Verdugo

Author: Honore de Balzac

Translator: Katharine Prescott Wormeley

Release Date: August, 1998  [Etext #1425]
Posting Date: February 24, 2010

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EL VERDUGO ***




Produced by John Bickers, and Dagny





EL VERDUGO


By Honore De Balzac



Translated by Katharine Prescott Wormeley




                             DEDICATION

                       To Martinez de la Rosa.





EL VERDUGO

The clock of the little town of Menda had just struck midnight. At that
moment a young French officer, leaning on the parapet of a long terrace
which bordered the gardens of the chateau de Menda, seemed buried
in thoughts that were deeper than comported with the light-hearted
carelessness of military life; though it must be said that never were
hour, scene, or night more propitious for meditation. The beautiful sky
of Spain spread its dome of azure above his head. The scintillation of
the stars and the soft light of the moon illumined the delightful valley
that lay at his feet. Resting partly against an orange-tree in bloom,
the young major could see, three hundred feet below him, the town of
Menda, at the base of the rock on which the castle is built. Turning
his head, he looked down upon the sea, the sparkling waters of which
encircled the landscape with a sheet of silver.

The chateau was illuminated. The joyous uproar of a ball, the sounds of
an orchestra, the laughter of the dancers came to him, mingling with the
distant murmur of the waves. The coolness of the night gave fresh energy
to his body, that was tired with the heat of the day. Besides which, the
gardens were planted with trees so balmy and flowers so sweet, that the
young man felt as if plunged in a perfumed bath.

The chateau de Menda belonged to a grandee of Spain, who was at this
time living there with his family. During the whole evening, the eldest
daughter had looked at the young officer with an interest expressing
extreme sadness, and such implied compassion on the part of a Spaniard
might well have caused the reverie of the Frenchman. Clara was
beautiful; and though she had three brothers and one sister, the wealth
of the Marquis de Leganes seemed sufficient to justify Victor Marchand
in believing that the young lady would be richly dowered. But could he
dare to believe that the daughter of the proudest noble in Spain would
be given to the son of a Parisian grocer? Besides, Frenchmen were hated.
The marquis having been suspected by General G--t--r, who governed the
province, of preparing an insurrection in favor of Ferdinand VII., the
battalion commanded by Victor Marchand was quartered in the little town
of Menda, to hold in check the neighboring districts, which were under
the control of the Marquis de Leganes.

A recent despatch from Marechal Ney made it seem probable that the
English would soon land a force upon the coast; and he mentioned the
marquis as the man who was believed to be in communication with the
cabinet of London. Thus, in spite of the cordial welcome which that
Spaniard had given to Victor Marchand and his soldiers, the young
officer held himself perpetually on his guard. As he came from the
ballroom to the terrace, intending to cast his eye upon the state of the
town and the outlying districts confided to his care, he asked himself
how he ought to interpret the good will which the marquis never failed
to show him, and whether the fears of his general were warranted by the
apparent tranquillity of the region. But no sooner had he reached the
terrace than these thoughts were driven from his mind by a sense of
prudence, and also by natural curiosity.

He saw in the town a great number of lights. Although it was the feast
of Saint James, he had, that very morning, ordered that all lights
should be put out at the hour prescribed in the army regulations, those
of the chateau alone excepted. He saw, it is true, the bayonets of
his soldiers gleaming here and there at their appointed posts; but
the silence was solemn, and nothing indicated that the Spaniards were
disregarding his orders in the intoxication of a fete. Endeavoring to
explain to himself this culpable and deliberate infraction of rules on
the part of the inhabitants, it struck him as the more incomprehensible
because he had left a number of officers in charge of patrols who were
to make their rounds during the night, and enforce the regulations.

With the impetuosity of youth, he was about to spring through an opening
in the terrace wall, and descend by the rocks more rapidly than by the
usual road to a little outpost which he had placed at the entrance of
the town, on the side toward the chateau, when a slight noise arrested
him. He fancied he heard the light step of a woman on the gravelled path
behind him. He turned his head and saw no one, but his eyes were caught
by an extraordinary light upon the ocean. Suddenly he beheld a sight so
alarming that he stood for a moment motionless with surprise, fancying
that his senses were mistaken. The white rays of the moonlight enabled
him to distinguish sails at some distance. He tried to convince himself
that this vision was an optical delusion caused by the caprices of the
waves and the moon. At that moment, a hoarse voice uttered his name. He
looked toward the opening in the wall, and saw the head of the orderly
who had accompanied him to the chateau rising cautiously through it.

"Is it you, commander?"

"Yes. What is it?" replied the young man, in a low voice, a sort of
presentiment warning him to act mysteriously.

"Those rascals are squirming like worms," said the man; "and I have
come, if you please, to tell you my little observations."

"Speak out."

"I have just followed from the chateau a man with a lantern who is
coming this way. A lantern is mightily suspicious! I don't believe that
Christian has any call to go and light the church tapers at this time
of night. They want to murder us! said I to myself, so I followed his
heels; and I've discovered, commander, close by here, on a pile of rock,
a great heap of fagots--he's after lighting a beacon of some kind up
here, I'll be bound--"

A terrible cry echoing suddenly through the town stopped the soldier's
speech. A brilliant light illuminated the young officer. The poor
orderly was shot in the head and fell. A fire of straw and dry wood
blazed up like a conflagration not thirty feet distant from the young
commander. The music and the laughter ceased in the ballroom. The
silence of death, broken only by moans, succeeded to the joyous sounds
of a festival. A single cannon-shot echoed along the plain of the ocean.

A cold sweat rolled from the officer's brow. He wore no sword. He was
confident that his soldiers were murdered, and that the English were
about to disembark. He saw himself dishonored if he lived, summoned
before a council of war to explain his want of vigilance; then he
measured with his eye the depths of the descent, and was springing
towards it when Clara's hand seized his.

"Fly!" she said; "my brothers are following me to kill you. Your
soldiers are killed. Escape yourself. At the foot of the rock, over
there, see! you will find Juanito's barb--Go, go!"

She pushed him; but the stupefied young man looked at her, motionless,
for a moment. Then, obeying the instinct of self-preservation which
never abandons any man, even the strongest, he sprang through the park
in the direction indicated, running among the rocks where goats alone
had hitherto made their way. He heard Clara calling to her brothers to
pursue him; he heard the steps of his murderers; he heard the balls of
several muskets whistling about his ears; but he reached the valley,
found the horse, mounted him, and disappeared with the rapidity of an
arrow.

A few hours later the young officer reached the headquarters of General
G--t--r, whom he found at dinner with his staff.

"I bring you my head!" cried the commander of the lost battalion as he
entered, pale and overcome.

He sat down and related the horrible occurrence. An awful silence
followed his tale.

"I think you were more unfortunate than criminal," replied the terrible
general, when at last he spoke. "You are not responsible for the crime
of those Spaniards; and, unless the marshal should think otherwise, I
absolve you."

These words gave but a feeble consolation to the unhappy officer.

"But when the emperor hears of it!" he cried.

"He will want to have you shot," said the general; "but we will see
about that. Now," he added in a stern tone, "not another word of this,
except to turn it into a vengeance which shall impress with salutary
terror a people who make war like savages."

An hour later a whole regiment, a detachment of cavalry, and a battery
of artillery were on their way to Menda. The general and Victor marched
at the head of the column. The soldiers, informed of the massacre of
their comrades, were possessed by fury. The distance which separated
the town of Menda from general headquarters, was marched with marvellous
rapidity. On the way, the general found all the villages under arms.
Each of the wretched hamlets was surrounded, and the inhabitants
decimated.

By one of those fatalities which are inexplicable, the British ships lay
to without advancing. It was known later that these vessels carried the
artillery, and had outsailed the rest of the transports. Thus the town
of Menda, deprived of the support it expected, and which the appearance
of the British fleet in the offing had led the inhabitants to suppose
was at hand, was surrounded by French troops almost without a blow being
struck. The people of the town, seized with terror, offered to surrender
at discretion. With a spirit of devotion not rare in the Peninsula,
the slayers of the French soldiery, fearing, from the cruelty of their
commander, that Menda would be given to the flames, and the whole
population put to the sword, proposed to the general to denounce
themselves. He accepted their offer, making a condition that the
inhabitants of the chateau, from the marquis to the lowest valet, should
be delivered into his hands. This condition being agreed to, the general
proceeded to pardon the rest of the population, and to prevent his
soldiers from pillaging the town or setting fire to it. An enormous
tribute was levied, and the wealthiest inhabitants held prisoner to
secure payment of it, which payment was to be made within twenty-four
hours.

The general took all precautions necessary for the safety of his troops,
and provided for the defence of the region from outside attack, refusing
to allow his soldiers to be billeted in the houses. After putting
them in camp, he went up to the chateau and took possession of it. The
members of the Leganes family and their servants were bound and kept
under guard in the great hall where the ball had taken place. The
windows of this room commanded the terrace which overhung the town.
Headquarters were established in one of the galleries, where the general
held, in the first place, a council as to the measures that should
be taken to prevent the landing of the British. After sending an
aide-de-camp to Marechal Ney, and having ordered batteries to certain
points along the shore, the general and his staff turned their attention
to the prisoners. Two hundred Spaniards who had delivered themselves
up were immediately shot. After this military execution, the general
ordered as many gibbets planted on the terrace as there were members of
the family of Leganes, and he sent for the executioner of the town.

Victor Marchand took advantage of the hour before dinner, to go and see
the prisoners. Before long he returned to the general.

"I have come," he said in a voice full of feeling, "to ask for mercy."

"You!" said the general, in a tone of bitter irony.

"Alas!" replied Victor, "it is only a sad mercy. The marquis, who has
seen those gibbets set up, hopes that you will change that mode of
execution. He asks you to behead his family, as befits nobility."

"So be it," replied the general.

"They also ask for religious assistance, and to be released from their
bonds; they promise in return to make no attempt to escape."

"I consent," said the general; "but I make you responsible for them."

"The marquis offers you his whole fortune, if you will consent to pardon
one of his sons."

"Really!" exclaimed the general. "His property belongs already to King
Joseph."

He stopped. A thought, a contemptuous thought, wrinkled his brow, and he
said presently,--

"I will surpass his wishes. I comprehend the importance of his last
request. Well, he shall buy the continuance of his name and lineage, but
Spain shall forever connect with it the memory of his treachery and his
punishment. I will give life and his whole fortune to whichever of his
sons will perform the office of executioner on the rest. Go; not another
word to me on the subject."

Dinner was served. The officers satisfied an appetite sharpened by
exertion. A single one of them, Victor Marchand, was not at the feast.
After hesitating long, he returned to the hall where the proud family
of Leganes were prisoners, casting a mournful look on the scene now
presented in that apartment where, only two nights before, he had seen
the heads of the two young girls and the three young men turning giddily
in the waltz. He shuddered as he thought how soon they would fall,
struck off by the sabre of the executioner.

Bound in their gilded chairs, the father and mother, the three sons, and
the two daughters, sat rigid in a state of complete immobility. Eight
servants stood near them, their arms bound behind their backs. These
fifteen persons looked at one another gravely, their eyes scarcely
betraying the sentiments that filled their souls. The sentinels, also
motionless, watched them, but respected the sorrow of those cruel
enemies.

An expression of inquiry came upon the faces of all when Victor
appeared. He gave the order to unbind the prisoners, and went himself to
unfasten the cords that held Clara in her chair. She smiled sadly. The
officer could not help touching softly the arms of the young girl as he
looked with sad admiration at her beautiful hair and her supple figure.
She was a true Spaniard, having the Spanish complexion, the Spanish eyes
with their curved lashes, and their large pupils blacker than a raven's
wing.

"Have you succeeded?" she said, with one of those funereal smiles in
which something of girlhood lingers.

Victor could not keep himself from groaning. He looked in turn at the
three brothers, and then at Clara. One brother, the eldest, was thirty
years of age. Though small and somewhat ill-made, with an air that was
haughty and disdainful, he was not lacking in a certain nobility of
manner, and he seemed to have something of that delicacy of feeling
which made the Spanish chivalry of other days so famous. He was named
Juanito. The second son, Felipe, was about twenty years of age; he
resembled Clara. The youngest was eight. A painter would have seen in
the features of Manuelo a little of that Roman constancy that David has
given to children in his republican pages. The head of the old marquis,
covered with flowing white hair, seemed to have escaped from a picture
of Murillo. As he looked at them, the young officer shook his head,
despairing that any one of those four beings would accept the dreadful
bargain of the general. Nevertheless, he found courage to reveal it to
Clara.

The girl shuddered for a moment; then she recovered her calmness, and
went to her father, kneeling at his feet.

"Oh!" she said to him, "make Juanito swear that he will obey,
faithfully, the orders that you will give him, and our wishes will be
fulfilled."

The marquise quivered with hope. But when, leaning against her husband,
she heard the horrible confidence that Clara now made to him, the mother
fainted. Juanito, on hearing the offer, bounded like a lion in his cage.

Victor took upon himself to send the guard away, after obtaining
from the marquis a promise of absolute submission. The servants were
delivered to the executioner, who hanged them.

When the family were alone, with no one but Victor to watch them, the
old father rose.

"Juanito!" he said.

Juanito answered only with a motion of his head that signified refusal,
falling back into his chair, and looking at his parents with dry and
awful eyes. Clara went up to him with a cheerful air and sat upon his
knee.

"Dear Juanito," she said, passing her arm around his neck and kissing
his eyelids, "if you knew how sweet death would seem to me if given by
you! Think! I should be spared the odious touch of an executioner. You
would save me from all the woes that await me--and, oh! dear Juanito!
you would not have me belong to any one--therefore--"

Her velvet eyes cast gleams of fire at Victor, as if to rouse in the
heart of Juanito his hatred of the French.

"Have courage," said his brother Felipe; "otherwise our race, our almost
royal race, must die extinct."

Suddenly Clara rose, the group that had formed about Juanito separated,
and the son, rebellious with good reason, saw before him his old father
standing erect, who said in solemn tones,--

"Juanito, I command you to obey."

The young count remained immovable. Then his father knelt at his feet.
Involuntarily Clara, Felipe, and Manuelo imitated his action. They
all stretched out their hands to him, who was to save the family from
extinction, and each seemed to echo the words of the father.

"My son, can it be that you would fail in Spanish energy and true
feeling? Will you leave me longer on my knees? Why do you consider
_your_ life, _your_ sufferings only? Is this my son?" he added, turning
to his wife.

"He consents!" cried the mother, in despair, seeing a motion of
Juanito's eyelids, the meaning of which was known to her alone.

Mariquita, the second daughter, was on her knees pressing her mother in
her feeble arms, and as she wept hot tears her little brother scolded
her.

At this moment the chaplain of the chateau entered the hall; the family
instantly surrounded him and led him to Juanito. Victor, unable to
endure the scene any longer, made a sign to Clara, and went away,
determined to make one more attempt upon the general.

He found him in fine good-humour, in the midst of a banquet, drinking
with his officers, who were growing hilarious.

              *     *     *     *     *

An hour later, one hundred of the leading inhabitants of Menda assembled
on the terrace, according to the orders of the general, to witness the
execution of the Leganes family. A detachment of soldiers were posted
to restrain the Spaniards, stationed beneath the gallows on which the
servants had been hanged. The heads of the burghers almost touched the
feet of these martyrs. Thirty feet from this group was a block, and
on it glittered a scimitar. An executioner was present in case Juanito
refused his obedience at the last moment.

Soon the Spaniards heard, in the midst of the deepest silence, the steps
of many persons, the measured sound of the march of soldiers, and the
slight rattle of their accoutrements. These noises mingled with the gay
laughter of the officers, as a few nights earlier the dances of a ball
had served to mask the preparations for a bloody treachery. All
eyes turned to the chateau and saw the noble family advancing with
inconceivable composure. Their faces were serene and calm.

One member alone, pale, undone, leaned upon the priest, who spent his
powers of religious consolation upon this man,--the only one who was to
live. The executioner knew, as did all present, that Juanito had agreed
to accept his place for that one day. The old marquis and his wife,
Clara, Mariquita, and the two younger brothers walked forward and knelt
down a few steps distant from the fatal block. Juanito was led forward
by the priest. When he reached the place the executioner touched him
on the arm and gave him, probably, a few instructions. The confessor,
meantime, turned the victims so that they might not see the fatal blows.
But, like true Spaniards, they stood erect without faltering.

Clara was the first to come forward.

"Juanito," she said, "have pity on my want of courage; begin with me."

At this instant the hurried steps of a man were heard, and Victor
Marchand appeared on the terrace. Clara was already on her knees, her
white neck bared for the scimitar. The officer turned pale, but he ran
with all his might.

"The general grants your life if you will marry me," he said to her in a
low voice.

The Spanish girl cast upon the officer a look of pride and contempt.

"Go on, Juanito!" she said, in a deep voice, and her head rolled at
Victor's feet.

The Marquise de Leganes made one convulsive movement as she heard that
sound; it was the only sign she gave of sorrow.

"Am I placed right this way, my good Juanito?" asked the little Manuelo
of his brother.

"Ah! you are weeping, Mariquita!" said Juanito to his sister.

"Yes," she said, "I think of you, my poor Juanito; how lonely you will
be without us."

Soon the grand figure of the marquis came forward. He looked at the
blood of his children; he turned to the mute and motionless spectators,
and said in a strong voice, stretching his hands toward Juanito,--

"Spaniards! I give my son my fatherly blessing! Now, _Marquis_, strike,
without fear--you are without reproach."

But when Juanito saw his mother approach him, supported by the priest,
he cried out: "She bore me!"

A cry of horror broke from all present. The noise of the feast and the
jovial laughter of the officers ceased at that terrible clamor.
The marquise comprehended that Juanito's courage was exhausted, and
springing with one bound over the parapet, she was dashed to pieces
on the rocks below. A sound of admiration rose. Juanito had fallen
senseless.

"General," said an officer, who was half drunk, "Marchand has just told
me the particulars of that execution down there. I will bet you never
ordered it."

"Do you forget, messieurs," cried General G--t--r, "that five hundred
French families are plunged in affliction, and that we are now in Spain?
Do you wish to leave our bones in its soil?"

After that allocution, no one, not even a sub-lieutenant, had the
courage to empty his glass.

In spite of the respect with which he is surrounded, in spite of the
title El Verdugo (the executioner) which the King of Spain bestowed as a
title of nobility on the Marquis de Leganes, he is a prey to sorrow; he
lives in solitude, and is seldom seen. Overwhelmed with the burden of
his noble crime, he seems to await with impatience the birth of a second
son, which will give him the right to rejoin the Shades who ceaselessly
accompany him.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of El Verdugo, by Honore de Balzac

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EL VERDUGO ***

***** This file should be named 1425.txt or 1425.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/4/2/1425/

Produced by John Bickers, and Dagny

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
