The Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch, Or The London Charivari, Vol. 102,
February 6, 1892, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Punch, Or The London Charivari, Vol. 102, February 6, 1892

Author: Various

Release Date: December 13, 2004 [EBook #14341]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH ***




Produced by Malcolm Farmer, William Flis, and the PG Online
Distributed Proofreading Team





PUNCH,

OR THE LONDON CHARIVARI.

VOL. 102.



February 6, 1892.




[Illustration: "A GOOD STAYER."

THE DEALER SAID, "THE MARE COULD STAY FOR EVER." SHE SEEMED INCLINED
TO DO SO WHEN JONES WISHED TO BE AFTER THE HOUNDS.]

       *       *       *       *       *

RECEIPT AGAINST INFLUENZA.

DEAR SIR,--I send you this gratis. It is for everybody's benefit,

Yours. GEORGE GUZZLETON, X.M.D.

P.S.--I give "_Coenae prescriptionem_" only, as the "_Prescrip:
prandialis_" can be taken out of this with variations.

  Ostr: frigid:                       11/2 doz.
  Pisc: anima: locus aut quid: ali:   [=a][=a][=a] xvi [dram]
  Cum: pom: terr: fervesc:            f 8[dram]
  Ad Hoc: bib: sextarium              1/2 mx.
  Ovem: torrid:                       [ounce]ss.
      virides: ad. lib.
  Per: dix: anas: agrestis:   }       f[dram]ij.
    Condim: pan: aut aliquid: }       fvijss.
  Prunosus: botulus:                  [=a][=a]f [dram]vj.
    Condim: prand: aut lact: Devonii: f 3 j.

  Liq. Pomm: et Gr: '84       }
  Aut Mo: et Chand: '84       }       Oj 4

_Fiat haust: sec: vel test: quaque hora: extra hora coenae: regulariter
sumendum._

_Si opus sit_: Misce: aq: sodae .. [dram]1/14.

_Misce: ot: grog: h.s.s. Si opus sit aut non._

       *       *       *       *       *

LITERARY GARDENING.--A Correspondent, signing himself "STULTUS IN
HORTU OR HORT-U-NOT?" writes, "Please, Sir, if my boy JOHN plant 'a
slip of a pen,' what will it come up?" _Answer paid_--A Jonquill.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO THE QUEEN.

(_FROM THE NATION._)

  Queenly as womanly, those words that start
  From sorrow's lip strike home to sorrow's heart.
    Madam, our griefs are one;
  But yours, from kinship close and your high place,
  The keener, mourning him in youth's glad grace
    Who loved you as a son.

  We mourn him too. Our wreaths of votive flowers
  Speak, mutely, for us. The deep gloom that lowers
    To-day across the land
  Is no mere pall of ceremonial grief.
  'Tis hard in truth, though reverent belief
    Bows to the chastening hand.

  Hard--for his parents, that young bride, and you,
  Bearer of much bereavement, woman true,
    And patriotic QUEEN!
  We hear the courage striking through the pain,
  As always in your long, illustrious reign,
    Which shrinking ne'er hath seen,--

  Shrinking from high-strung duty, the brave way
  Of an imperial spirit. So to-day
    Your People bow--in pride.
  The sympathy of millions is your own.
  May Glory long be guardian of your Throne,
    Love ever at its side!

       *       *       *       *       *

ENTIRELY UNSOLICITED TESTIMONIAL.--_Dartmoor_.--Gentlemen,--Two years
ago I wrote somebody else's name with one of your pens. Since then I
have used no other.

Yours faithfully, A.F. ORGER. "To Messrs. STEAL, KNIBBS & CO."

       *       *       *       *       *

"LA GRIPPE."

[Illustration]

    ("_I'm a devil! I'm a devil!" croaked Barnaby Rudge's Raven
    'Grip': And this is a raven-mad sort of Edgar-Allan-Poem by Un
    qui est Grippe._)

  Once upon a midnight dreary
  Coming home I felt so weary,
  Felt, oh! many a pain; so curious,
    Which I'd never felt before.
  Then to bed,--no chance of napping,
  Blankets, rugs about me wrapping,
    Feverish burning pains galore.
  "Oh! I've got it! oh!" I muttered,
    "Influenza!! what a bore!!"
    _Only_ this!!--Oh!!--Nothing more!!

  Oh! my head and legs are aching!
  Now I'm freezing! Now I'm baking!
  Clockwork in my cerebellum!
    Oh! all over me I'm sore!
  In my bed I'm writhing, tossing,
  Yet I'm in a steamer, crossing.
  While KIRALFY's Venice bossing,
    I'm "against" and RUSSELL "for"
  In a case about the _Echo_,
    Somewhere out at Singapore!
    It's delirium!!! Nothing more.

  Then a Doctor comes in tapping
  Me all over, tapping, rapping.
  And with ear so close and curious
    Pressed to stethoscope, "Once more,"
  Says he, "sing out ninety-ninely,
  Now again! You do it finely!
  Yes! Not bigger than a wine lee,
    There's the mischief, there's the _corps_
  Of the insect that will kill us,
  Hiding there is the Bacillus;
    Only _that_, and nothing more!"

  "Why's he here with fear to fill us?
  Will he leave me, this Bacillus?
  Not one bone do I feel whole in,
    And of strength I've lost my store."
  Thus I to the Doctor talking,
  Ask "When shall I go out walking"?
  He, my earnest queries baulking,
    Says, "When all this trouble's o'er,"
  "Monday? Tuesday? Wednesday? Thursday
    Friday? Saturday? Sunday? or
    In a week?" "Um!--not before."

  "Doctor!" cried I, "catch this evil
  Fiend! Bacillus!! Microbe!! devil!!
  Second syllable in Tem-pest!
    Send him to Plutonian Shore.
  Send him back to where he came from,
  To the place he gets his fame from,
  To the place he takes his name from;
    Kick him out of my front door!"
  So the Doctor feels my pulse, and,
    As I drop upon the floor,
    Quoth the Doctor, "Some days more."

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: "OUT IN THE COLD!"

"I AM LIKE A TRAVELLER LOST IN THE SNOW, WHO BEGINS TO GET STIFF WHILE
THE SNOWFLAKES COVER HIM."

_Speech of Prince Von Bismarck at Friedrichsruhe._]

       *       *       *       *       *

"OUT IN THE COLD!"

    ["I am like a traveller lost in the snow, who begins to get
    stiff and to sink down while the snowflakes cover him. In
    fact, I am gradually losing interest in politics, but the
    feeling, like that of the traveller sinking under the snow,
    is a pleasant one."--_Prince Bismarck to the Deputation of
    Leipsic Students_.]

AIR--"_Excelsior_!"

  The century was waning fast,
  As through a wintry waste there passed
  A man, who bore, 'mid snow and ice,
  A banner with the strange device,
            Excel no more!

  His brows were blanched; his eye beneath
  Flashed like a falchion from its sheath;
  Red fields had heard his armour clang.
  But now he smiled and softly sang,
            Excel no more!

  In barracks huge he saw the might
  Of mailed hosts arrayed for fight;
  Afar the fierce Frank bayonets shone,
  And from his lips escaped a moan,
            Excel no more!

  "Think of the Past!" the young men said,
  "Like SAUL you towered by the head
  Midst those three Titans, Prussia's pride!"
  Softly that once stern voice replied,
            "Excel no more!"

  "Oh, stay," the young men cried, "and mix
  Once more in Teuton Politics!"
  "Nay," said the Titan, "I grow old,
  And, like poor TOM, I am a-cold!
            Excel no more!"

  "Beware the snow-encumbered branch!
  Beware the whelming avalanche!"
  "Thanks!" he replied. "I know, I know.
  But--well, I rather like the snow!
            Excel no more!"

  "Lost in the snow! An easy death!
  Gentle surcease of mortal breath!
  I sink, I stiffen, I'm foredone!
  The feeling though's a pleasant one;
            Excel no more!"

  The traveller by his faithful hound
  Half-buried in the snow was found,
  Still muttering from a mouth of ice
  That banner's late and strange device,
            Excel no more!

  There in the snow-drift cold and grey,
  Silent, but stalwart, still he lay,
  Great "Blood-and-Iron," brave and bold,
  But--for the nonce--"Out in the Cold!"
            Excel no more?

       *       *       *       *       *

PARLIAMENT IN SPORT;

_OR, A MEETING IN EARNEST._

    ["Perhaps the popularity of the competition in national sport
    between the different parts of the Empire is worthy of the
    serious attention of statesmen ... Mr. ASTLEY COOPER proposes
    rowing, running and cricket ... There is something fascinating
    in the idea of such a Pan-Britannic gathering."--_Daily
    Paper_.]

The SPEAKER, having taken his seat in the Pavilion, the Minister for
Cricket rose to move the third reading of The Six-balls-to-an-over
Bill.

The Right Hon. Gentleman said that the amount of time wasted in
changing sides, although the field did their best to minimise the
loss by assuming a couple of positions alternately, was very
serious--especially in a first-class match.

The Member for Melbourne begged to ask what _was_ a first-class match?

The Member for Sydney replied, certainly not a match between Canada
and Victoria. (_Laughter.)_ Now everyone was aware that New South
Wales--("_Question! Order! Order!")_ He begged pardon, he was in
order.

The SPEAKER. I really must request silence. The Minister for Cricket
is introducing a most important measure, and the least we can do is to
receive his statement with adequate attention. (_General cheering_.)

The Minister for Cricket continued, and said that the measure he had
the honour to commend to their careful consideration would not only
lengthen the over, but also allow Cricket to be played all the year
round.

The Minister for Football begged to remind his Right Hon. friend
that he had promised to consider that matter in Committee. What would
become of Football were Cricket to be played continuously? ("_Hear,
hear_!")

The Member for Bombay thought that a matter of no moment. In India
Polo was of infinitely more importance than Football, and he could
not help remarking that, in the Imperial Parliament, representing so
many sports, and so many Colonies, where every great interest was
represented, and well represented, Polo was absolutely ignored.
(_Cheers.)_

The Minister for Aquatic Sports agreed with the Hon. Member. Polo was
entirely of sufficient interest to warrant the creation of a special
department for its guardianship. But at present he was responsible for
it. He hoped soon to be able to welcome a colleague who would make its
interests his continual study. (_"Hear, hear!"_)

The Minister for Cricket concluded by thanking the House for the
attention the Hon. Members had given to the subject, and sat down
amidst loud applause.

A division being taken, the Bill was carried by 127 to 96. The
majority were composed of Australians and Canadians, and the minority
were Africans, Indians, and miscellaneous Colonists. The House then
adjourned.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: TRUTHFUL BUT NOT CONSCIENTIOUS.

_Elderly Dowager_. "Now, PERKINS, I REQUIRE YOUR HONEST OPINION. DON'T
YOU THINK THIS DRESS SUITS ME?"

_Perkins (who has been cautioned always to speak the truth, on pain of
losing her place, warily_). "OH YES, MY LADY, IT SUITS YOUR LADYSHIP
QUITE--AS ONE MAY SAY--QUITE 'DOWN TO THE GROUND!'"]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE TRAVELLING COMPANIONS.

NO. XXV.

    SCENE--_Near Torcello. CULCHARD and PODBURY are seated
    side by side in the gondola, which is threading its way
    between low banks, bright with clumps of Michaelmas daisies
    and pomegranate-trees laden with red fruit. Both CULCHARD
    and PODBURY are secretly nervous and anxious for
    encouragement._

_Podbury_ (_humming "In Old Madrid" with sentiment_).
La-doodle-um-La-doodle-oo: La-doodle-um-te-dumpty-loodle-oo! I think
she rather seemed to like me--those first days at Brussels, don't
_you_?

_Culchard_ (_absently_). Did she? I daresay. (_Whistling "The
Wedding March" softly_.) Few-fee; di-fee-fee-few-few;
few-fiddledy-fee-fiddledy-few-few-few-fee. I fancy I'm right in my
theory, eh?

_Podb._ Oh, I should say so--yes. _What_ theory?

_Culch._ (_annoyed_). What theory? Why, the one I've been explaining
to you for the last ten minutes!--that all this harshness of hers
lately is really, when you come to analyse it, a decidedly encouraging
symptom.

_Podb._ But I shouldn't nave said Miss TROTTER was exactly _harsh_ to
me--lately, at all events.

_Culch._ (_with impatience_). Miss TROTTER! You! What an egotist you
are, my dear fellow! I was referring to myself and Miss PRENDERGAST.
And you can't deny that, both at Nuremberg and Constance, she--

_Podb._ (_with careless optimism_). Oh, _she_'ll come round all right,
never fear. I only wish I was half as safe with Miss TROTTER!

_Culch._ (_mollified_). Don't be too downhearted, my dear PODBURY. I
happen to know that she likes you--she told me as much last night. Did
Miss PRENDERGAST--er--say anything to that effect about _me_?

_Podb._ Well,--not exactly, old chap--not to me, at least. But I say,
Miss TROTTER didn't tell you _that_? Not _really_? Hooray! Then it's
all right--she may have me, after all!

_Culch._ (_chillingly_). I should advise you not to be over confident.
(_A silence follows, which endures until they reach the landing-steps
at Torcello._) They _are_ here, you see--those are evidently their
gondolas, I recognise those two cloaks. Now the best thing _we_ can do
is to separate.

_Podb._ (_springing out_). Right you are! (_To himself._) I'll draw
the church first, and see if she's there. (_Approaches the door of
Santa Maria: a Voice within, apparently reading aloud: "Six balls, or
rather almonds, of purple marble veined with white are set around the
edge of the pulpit, and form its only decoration"_) HYPATIA, by Jove!
Narrow shave that! [_He goes round to back._

_Culch._ (_comes up to the door_). I know I shall find her here. Lucky
I know that Torcello chapter in "The Stones" very nearly by heart!
(_Reaches threshold. A Voice within. "Well, I guess I'm going to climb
up and sit in that old amphitheatre there, and see how it feels!"_)
Good heavens,--_MAUD_! and I was as nearly as possible--I think I'll
go up to the top of the Campanile and see if I can't discover where
HYPATIA is.

    [_He ascends the tower._

    _In the Belfry._

_Podb._ (_arriving breathless, and finding CULCHARD craning eagerly
forward_). Oh, so _you_ came up too? Well, can you _see_ her?

_Culch._ Ssh! She's just turned the corner! (_Vexed._) She's with Miss
TROTTER!... They're sitting down on the grass below!

_Podb._ Together? That's a nuisance! Now we shall have to wait till
they separate--sure to squabble, sooner or later.

_Miss T.'s Voice_ (_which is perfectly audible above_). I guess we'll
give RUSKIN a rest now, HYPATIA. I'm dying for a talk. I'm just as
enchanted as I can be to hear you've dismissed Mr. PODBURY. And I
expect you can guess _why_.

_Podb._ (_in a whisper_). I say, CULCHARD, they're going to talk about
us. Ought we to listen, eh? Better let them know we're here?

_Culch._ I really don't see any necessity--however--(_Whistles
feebly._) Feedy-feedy-feedle!

[Illustration: "Hypatia, by Jove!"]

_Podb._ What is the use of fustling like that? (_Yoedels._) Lul-li-ety!

_Miss P.'s V._ Well, my dear MAUD, I confess that I--

_Culch._ It's quite impossible to make them hear down there, and it's
no fault of ours if their voices reach us occasionally. And it
_does_ seem to me, PODBURY, that, in a matter which may be of
vital importance to me--to us both--it would be absurd to be
over-scrupulous. But of course you will please yourself. _I_ intend to
remain where I am.

    [_PODBURY makes a faint-hearted attempt to go, but ends by
    resigning himself to the situation._

_Miss T.'s V._ Now, HYPATIA PRENDERGAST, don't tell _me_ you're not
interested in him! And he's more real suited to you than ever Mr.
PODBURY was. Now, isn't that _so_?

_Culch._ (_withdrawing his head_). Did you hear, PODBURY? She's
actually pleading for me! _Isn't_ she an angel? Be quiet, now. I must
hear the answer!

_Miss P.'s V._ I--I don't know, really. But, MAUD, I want to speak to
you about--Somebody. You can't think how he adores you, poor fellow! I
have noticed it for a long time.

_Podb._ (_beaming_). CULCHARD! You heard? She's putting in a word for
me. What a brick that girl is!

_Miss T.'s V._ I guess he's pretty good at concealing his feelings,
then. He's been keeping far enough away!

_Miss P.'s V._ That was _my_ fault. I _kept_ him by me. You see, I
believed you had quite decided to accept Mr. CULCHARD.

_Miss T.'s V._ Well, it does strike me that, considering he was
adoring me all this time, he let himself be managed tolerable easy.

    [_PODBURY shakes his head in protestation._

_Miss P.'s V._ Ah, but let me explain. I could only keep him quiet
by threatening to go home by myself, and dear BOB is such a devoted
brother that--

_Podb._ Brother! I say. CULCHARD, she can't be meaning _BOB_ all this
time! She _can't_! Can she now?

_Culch._ How on earth can _I_ tell? If it is so, you must be a
philosopher, my dear fellow, and bear it--that's all.

_Miss P.'s V._ That _does_ alter the case, doesn't it? And I may tell
him there's some hope for him? You mustn't judge him by what he is
with his friend, Mr. PODBURY. BOB has such a _much_ stronger and finer
character!

_Miss T.'s V._ Oh well, if he couldn't stand up more on his edge than
Mr. PODBURY! Not that I mind Mr. PODBURY any, there's no harm in him,
but he's too real frivolous to amount to much.

_Podb._ (_collapsing_). Frivolous! From _her_ too! Oh, hang it _all_!

    [_He buries his head in his hands with a groan._

_Miss T.'s V._ Well, see here, HYPATIA. I'll take your brother on
trial for a spell, to oblige you--there. I cann't say more at present.
And now--about the other. I want to know just how you feel about him.

_Culch._ The _other_!--that's Me! I wish to goodness you wouldn't make
all that noise, PODBURY, just when it's getting interesting!

_Miss P.'s V._ (_very low_). What is the good? Nothing will bring him
back--_now_!

_Culch._ Nothing? How little she knows me!

_Miss T.'s V._ I hope you don't consider _me_ nothing. And a word from
me would bring him along pretty smart. The only question is, whether
I'm to say it or not?

_Miss P.'s V._ (_muffled_). Dar-ling!

_Culch._ I really think I might almost venture to go down, now, eh,
PODBURY? (_No answer._) Selfish brute! [_Indignantly._

_Miss T.'s V._ But mind this--if he comes, you've got to care for him
the whole length of your boa--you won't persuade him to run in couples
with anybody else. That's why he broke away the first time--and you
were ever so mad with me because you thought I was at the bottom
of it. But it was all his pride. He's too real independent to share
chances with anybody alive.

_Culch._ How thoroughly she understands me!

_Miss T.'s V._ And I guess CHARLEY will grow out of the great Amurrcan
Novel in time--it's not going ever to grow out of _him_, anyway!

_Culch._ (_bewildered_). CHARLEY? I don't see why she should mention
VAN BOODELER _now_!

_Miss T.'s V._ I like CHARLEY ever so much, and I'm not going to have
him cavort around along with a circus of suitors under vows. So, if I
thought there was any chance of--well, say Mr. CULCHARD--

_Miss P.'s V._ (_indignant_). MAUD! how _can_ you? That odious
hypocritical creature! If you knew how I despised and--!

_Miss T.'s V._ Well, my dear, he's pretty paltry--but we'll let him go
at that--I guess his shares have gone down considerable all round.

_Culch._ PODBURY, I--I--this conversation is evidently not intended
for--for other--ears. I don't know whether _you_ have heard enough,
_I_ shall go down!

_Podb._ (_with a ghastly chuckle_). Like your shares, eh, old chap?
And mine too, for that matter. Well, _I'm_ ready enough to go. Only,
for goodness' sake, let's get away without being seen!

    [_They slip softly down the series of inclined planes, and out
    to the steps, where they re-embark. As their gondola pushes
    off, Mr. TROTTER and BOB PRENDERGAST appear from the
    Museum._

_Mr. T._ Why, land sakes! ain't that Mr. PODBURY and Mr. CULCHARD? Hi!
You ain't ever going away? There's my darter and Miss HYPATIA around
somewhere.--They'll be dreadful disappointed to have missed you!

_Podb._ (_with an heroic attempt at cheeriness_). We--we're awfully
disappointed to have missed _them_, Mr. TROTTER. Afraid we can't stop
now! Goodbye!

    [_CULCHARD pulls his hat-brim over his eyes and makes a sign
    to the gondoliers to get on quickly; Mr. TROTTER comments
    with audible astonishment on their departure to BOB, who
    preserves a discreet silence._

       *       *       *       *       *

A PALMY DAY AT ST. RAPHAEL.

_Villa Magali._--Delicious climate! STUART-RENDEL says it "reminds
him of Devonshire, without the damp." Mention of Devonshire reminds
_me_ of the DUKE. Try to point out to my friends that the Rossendale
Election shows conclusively--Curious! Friends all get up and go out!
Seems that ANDREW CLARKE specially told them I was to "avoid all
excitement, over-exertion, and talk about politics!" Wish CLARKE would
not be so unreasonable. _Must_ talk about Rossendale to somebody.

_Off to Hyeres_--to see CHILDERS. Find CHILDERS tolerably chatty.
Doesn't seem to care so much about Rossendale result as I should have
expected. STUART-RENDEL comes to fetch me. Ahem! Off.

_At Monte Carlo._--Feel so well, have looked in here. Meet WELLS, the
"Champion Plunger." Asks me if I've got a system; he's "been losing
heavily, and would be glad of any hint." Suggest his putting on the
numbers of Rossendale Majority. WELLS seems pleased at idea. Does so
at once, and loses 10,000 francs straight off. Meet him in grounds
afterwards, and try to explain real significance of Rossendale
election. WELLS disappears. Curious! _Can_ ANDREW CLARKE have got at
WELLS?

_Golfe San Juan._--French war-ships in Bay. Admiral might like to know
my views on Rossendale and politics generally. Taken on board. Admiral
much interested in MADEN's victory. Admiral asks if it was the "_Grand
Prix_" that MADEN won? Find he thinks MADEN is a horse. Disappointing.
[_Query_--ANDREW CLARKE again?] Sent on shore in boat, amid cheers
from sailors. Gratifying.

_Back to St. Raphael._--Tired, but on the whole gratified with my day.
Friends pained to hear what I've done, and threaten to telegraph for
Sir ANDREW! Shall pack up and return. Letter from MORLEY begging me to
stay where I am. Odd! Can Sir ANDREW have got at JOHN MORLEY? Bed, and
think it over.

       *       *       *       *       *

BROTHER BRUSH, A.R.A.--Stan' up, STANHOPE FORBES! and receive our
congratulations on your election. STAN-HOPE deferred maketh the
painter's 'art sick of waiting, and now A FORBES, not _The_ FORBES
(which his name is JAMES STAATS, C.L.C. & D.R., &c., &c.), but the
STANHOPE A-foresaid, has obtained his first grade. With what pleasure
will the Art-loving Chairman see his STANHOPE "on the line!" In
Burlington House, of course we mean, as elsewhere, the situation would
be one of no slight danger.

       *       *       *       *       *

"PLEASED AS PUNCH."--A paragraph in the _D.T._ informed _Mr. P._
and the public generally, that "Dr. ROBSON ROOSE and Mr. ALLINGHAM
are contented with Mr. EDWARD LAWSON's progress." "If Box"--"And
Cox"--"are satisfied," then of all Mr. E.L.'s friends in front none
will be more delighted to hear of his complete recovery than his
neighbour, _Mr. Punch_, of 85, Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

SOMETHING NEW IN SOAP.--The Soap Trade is still booming. Almost every
week appears a fresh candidate for public favour, its claim based upon
some alluring speciality. We hear of a newcomer likely to take the
cake (of soap). On all the walls, and in most of the advertisement
columns, will presently blaze forth its proud legend:--"The
Satisfactory Soap--Won't Wash Anything."

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: LEGAL IMPROVEMENTS.

IN ORDER TO HUSBAND OUR JUDICIAL STAFF, IN FUTURE A JUDGE WILL BE
EXPECTED TO HEAR TWO CASES AT THE SAME TIME.

PORTRAIT OF A JUDGE TRYING A THEATRICAL "CAUSE CELEBRE," AND A NICE
QUESTION AS TO A "REMAINDER-MAN" AND A "TENANT IN TAIL MALE."]

       *       *       *       *       *

HIGH (BEERBOHM) TREESON!

DEAR MR. PUNCH,--I see that Mr. BEERBOHM TREE in his recent production
of _Hamlet_ has introduced a novelty into the tragedy by inventing
fresh business. Unauthorised by the text, he has included _Ophelia_
amongst the Court "attendants," and, finding her on the stage, has
indulged in a dignified flirtation (in dumb show), worthy of the hero
of _L'Enfant Prodigue_ himself. Now I think this a great improvement,
and were the masterpiece to be "written up" throughout on the same
lines, I am sure the representation would be received with enthusiasm.
It might be that the performance would be a little longer, but think
of the enormous gain in interest. To show you what I mean, I take the
first five lines of the opening Act:--

SHAKSPEARE'S VERSION.

    SCENE I.--_Elsinore. A Platform before the Castle. FRANCISCO
    on his post. Enter to him BERNARDO._

  _Bernardo._ Who's there?

  _Francisco._ Nay answer me: stand and unfold yourself!

This passage, furnished with proper business, might be rendered the
means of showing the sort of life led by _Laertes_, justifying the
advice subsequently given to him by _Polonius_ more appropriate to
the conditions of the case as now (for the first time) fully divulged,
Thus--I give my view of the matter:--

AMENDED VERSION.

    SCENE I.--_Elsinore. A Platform before the Castle. As the
    Curtain rises, shouts and laughs are heard without. A Village
    Maiden rushes in, as if pursued. She hides herself behind the
    sentry-box, and then escapes. FRANCISCO, who is on his post,
    looks about, and is surrounded by Danish Gallants, who have
    come in pursuit of the Maiden. He threatens them with his
    arms, and only one remains, who seems overcome by wine. The
    intoxicated Gallant is masked, and evidently very much the
    worse for liquor. He clumsily draws his sword. FRANCISCO
    is about to despatch him, when the mask falls, and in the
    dissipated reveller the Sentry recognises the bloated features
    of LAERTES. He immediately presents arms, as LAERTES
    is his superior officer. LAERTES, half-sobered by this
    suggestion of discipline, wishes to retire unseen, and gives
    largesse to FRANCISCO. The Sentry is greatly gratified, when
    to them enters BERNARDO._

  _Ber._ Who's there?

  _Fran._ (_sheltering LAERTES, who stealthily retires by
    a rope-ladder which falls from the battlements to the moat
    below_). Nay, answer me. Stand and unfold yourself!

By my version I really introduce a most interesting underplot, which,
in my opinion, is equally pleasing and quite as defensible as Mr.
BEERBOHM TREE's business with _Ophelia_.

Yours, A STICKLER.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: HUMAN NATURE.

_Jones has always professed the greatest Indifference to (and contempt
for) all Press Criticisms on his Work (although he takes in all the
Papers)._

YET THIS IS WHAT HE LOOKED LIKE WHEN HIS NEW NOVEL WAS PRONOUNCED A
WORK OF GENIUS BY THE _UPPER TOOTING EXPRESS_.

AND THIS IS HOW HE APPEARED WHEN THE _NORTH CLAPHAM GAZETTE_ DISMISSED
THAT IMMORTAL BOOK AS A PIECE OF DRIVELLING SENILE TWADDLE.

AND THIS IS THE WAY HE TREATS ALL NEWSPAPERS, REVIEWS, PERIODICALS,
&C., &C., THAT LEAVE THE IMMORTAL BOOK UNNOTICED!]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE ATTACK ON THE "CAPITAL."

_A LAY OF MODERN LONDON._

    [Arrangements have been made for great political meetings
    in the Metropolis, at which the Liberal Leaders will be the
    principal speakers.]

  HARCURTIUS of the triple chin, by the Nine Points he swore
  The Capital should suffer from Tory sway no more;
  By the Nine Points he swore it, and named a trysting day,
  And bade his messengers ride forth east and west, and south and north,
            To summon his array.

  East and west, and south and north the messengers ride fast;
  From Kennington to Poplar they've heard the trumpet's blast.
  Shame on the false Caucusian who loiters in his Club
  When triple-chin'd HARCURTIUS prepares the foe to drub!
  Too long the Capital hath borne the stubborn Tory yoke,
  Too long the Liberals have failed to strike a swashing stroke.
  Betrayed to Tory clutches by traitors shrewd and strong,
  The banded foes have held it all too firmly and too long.
  SALISBURIUS and GOSCHENIUS have struck unholy pact,
  Foes long in dubious seeming, but ever friends, in fact,
  Devonian CAVENDUS, he of the broad and bovine jowl,
  Who smiled but coldly ever, now on our cause doth scowl.
  Cock-nosed CUBICULARIUS, once a Captain of our host,
  Now chums with bland BALFOURIUS, and makes that bond his boast.
  Oh, was there ever such a gang, so motley and so mixed,
  To garrison a Citadel on which all hopes are fixed?
  Oh, was there ever such a call to strike one mighty blow,
  To snatch the Capital once more, and lay the traitors low?

  HARCURTIUS hurries onward, he waves the Grand Old Flag,
  And when that banner flouts the breeze, what slave so base as lag?
  GLADSTONIUS at his elbow,--not he the Old, the Grand,--
  He shuns the fogs of winter in a far-off sunny land,
  Nursing his force for the great fray that may right soon come on,--
  This is not he of Hawarden, but the old hero's son:
  There's OTTO, of the brindled beard, RUSSELLIUS swift of tongue,
  RIPONIUS and LEFEVRIUS into the fray have flung.
  Sleek-haired STANSFELDUS also, MUNDELLA of the Beak.
  That CORVUS of the legion, good both to fight and speak,
  LEO PLAYFAIRIUS follows, and brave BANNERMANUS bears
  The flag he's fond of flaunting, there gallant AUCEPS dares
  All that becomes a hero, whilst last, but oh, not least!
  KIMBERLEYUS fares forth to the fight as others to a feast.
  "Now, up!" cried stout HARCURTIUS, "Up! and we yet shall trap 'em!
  Kennington calls, and Hackney, with Fulham, too, and Clapham.
  I hear the cry of Chelsea, Islington North and West
  Raise wails that find an echo in this mail-covered breast.
  Bermondsey and Whitechapel upraise a piteous plaint:
  ('Wy don't our 'eroes wisit _hus_? We looks and there they ain't!')
  North Lambeth long neglected, and Wandsworth far South-West,
  (If I know where these places be I wish I may be blest!)
  Appeal to us for succour: then Peckham, gallant Peckham,
  Makes a far cry from her famed Rye. O brethren, shall we check 'em,
  These brave suburban stalwarts whose home is in the waste
  Afar from Pall Mall portals, swell Clubs, and homes of taste,
  But who have Votes, my brethren? Nay, shout ye men of pith,
  And strike for pining Poplar and hapless Hammersmith!"
  "Quite so!" cries 'cute MUNDELLA, the corvine chief and conky,
  "But he who maketh too much noise may show himself a donkey.
  The Capital seems quiet, Sir, the garrison is still,
  Suppose we try that old Gaul game!" HARCURTIUS cries, "I will!"
  Then silently and slowly, and all in single file,
  They climb towards the Citadel. HARCURTIUS, with a smile,
  Hath his head o'er the ramparts, when--Great CAESAR, what is this?
  They're greeted with one loud, prolonged, and universal _hiss_!
  The sudden sibilation out of silence startles all,
  HARCURTIUS clangs his buckler, OTTO nearly hath a fall,
  "Great gods, the Geese are on us, those confounded Sacred Geese,
  See their long necks, twig their broad beaks! Cease, senile
          cacklers, cease!"

  So gaspeth great HARCURTIUS, but gaspeth all in vain.
  The gaff is blown, the anserine guard gives tongue with might and main.
  A stir, a tramp of mailed feet, a torch-flare! Whillaloo!
  "Say, is this MARCUS MANLIUS? No, hang it, there be two,
  SALISBURIUS and GOSCHENIUS, with a host, no doubt, behind,
   They're on their guard, whate'er may chance, we shall not 'catch
          'em blind'
  Like gudgeon. No! there's not a chance of a surprise by night;
  If the Gauls take the Citadel, ye gods, they'll have to _fight_!"
  How history repeats itself! At least we must agree,
  The Geese have roused the Capital? And _saved_ it? We shall see!

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE ATTACK ON THE "CAPITAL."]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: SO ARTLESS!

SCENE--_A Cinderella Dance._

_Swell_ (_to ingenuous Maiden_). "ARE YOU ENGAGED?"

_Ingenuous Maiden._ "NO--BUT--I SHOULD SO LIKE TO BE!"

[_And, as the old game has it, the consequences were ----!_]

       *       *       *       *       *

"COME HITHER, HUBERT!"

We are able to present our readers with a few notes of a lecture to
be given by Professor HUBERT HERKOMER, R.A. (by the kind permission
of AUTHOR PINERO, Esq.), to all managers, actors, actresses,
scene-painters, authors, composers, musicians, costumiers, and
wig-makers who will honour him with their attention. On this occasion
the Professor will (among other things) explain, by the aid of a Magic
Lantern (an entirely new invention recently discovered by Professor
H.H.) how to enlighten the stage darkness generally. The Professor
will also combat the erroneous impression derived from the dark ages
of SHAKSPEARE's time, that the Moon, or the Man in it,--probably a
lime-lighterman,--ought servilely to follow the movements, in order to
throw light upon them, of the Principal Performer. The Professor will
observe--"Such a course, on the part of the Direction of the Moon,
can only be considered beneficial to Art, when it is directed against
'The Star System.' As each theatrical Star has its own particular
brilliancy, why lug in the Moon? SHAKSPEARE, no doubt, had the Stage
Moon in full view when he makes _Juliet_ roundly exclaim, 'Oh, swear
not by the Moon, the inconstant Moon!' as, of course, a Moon bound
to illuminate the business of any one actor must follow him about,
and so, though 'constant' to _him_ individually, would be open to a
general charge of inconstancy from the spectators in front. Such a
course for the Moon to take is, as some of the better instructed among
you may possibly be aware, quite unwarranted by the lunar laws of
Nature, &c., &c."

This interesting entertainment will wind up with a dialogue between
_Arthur_ (JONES) and _Hubert_ (HERKOMER), of which we give an extract.
It represents _Arthur_ as wishing to produce a piece, which _Hubert_
forewarns him will be a failure unless he (HUBERT) paints the scenery
and manages it generally.

  _Arthur._ Is there no remedy?

  _Hubert._                 None, but to use _my_ eyes.

  _Arthur._ O HUBERT! If you will, cut down my 'lengths.'
    And I'll be merry as the day is long,
    So you don't interfere. You've other irons
    Hot in the fire.

  _Hubert_ (_aside_). With his innocent prate
    He will awake my mercy which lies dead.
    (_Aloud._) Read this, young ARTHUR!

    [_Gives him a Manuscript._

  _Arthur_ (_opens it. Starts_). What! a play by YOU!
    To be produced by _me_! O HUBERT!! [_Faints._

We regret that want of space prevents our giving any more of this
charming work at present, but no doubt it will not be long ere the
Public has the gratification of hearing and seeing it all.

       *       *       *       *       *

A PARAGON FRAME (OF MIND).

    ["I never took anybody's umbrella."--_Plaintiff (a Cook) in a
    recent Breach of Promise Case._]

  Common are Cooks, professed, plain alike
    And common, youths their sustenance who feed on,
  Common (I'm told) a breach of promise suit,
    And common, damages, in courts agreed on;
  Common are briefs as blackberries; and fees
    Are common quite as "leather and prunella";
  Common are "unprotected" witnesses
  ("_Credat_"--as HORACE somewhere sings--"_Apella_!")
  But most uncommon seems a lowly Cook
  Who with sincerity can kiss the book
  And swear (to shame her betters!) ne'er she took
  By sad "mistake or otherwise," by hook;
  Or, as will eventuate, by crook,
    Be it silk or gingham--any one's umbrella!

       *       *       *       *       *

MRS. RAM ON CURRENT POLITICS.--"Politics," says Mrs. RAMSBOTHAM, "is
one of the few things I know nothing about. But it does seem to me
that Lord GRANDOLPH CHURCHILL is a white elephant tied round the neck
of Lord SALISBURY."

       *       *       *       *       *

"HEAVENS!"--Recently in the _Athenaeum_, and copied elsewhere, appeared
the most interesting intelligence that has been received on earth for
some time. "The small planet No. 315"--no further address is given, an
omission which will, no doubt, be rectified in the next issue--"which
was discovered at Nice by M. CHARLOIS on the 4th September,
1891,"--the small planet, of course, not being out of the nurse's
arms, was not responsible for being at Nice at an unfashionable time,
but this, of course, is the fault of her parents and guardians--"has
been named Constantia." Rather late to delay the christening for
nearly five months. Of course, the brilliant infant will not stay at
Nice, except by medical advice, but will probably return to No. 315,
Milky Way (or elsewhere), on the first opportunity. _Sic itur ad
astra_!

       *       *       *       *       *

"A STUDENT OF HISTORY" writes to us:--"Sir--I have been reading a
great deal lately on ecclesiastical subjects, and shall be very much
obliged if you will explain to me briefly what 'Inclosed Orders'
are." [If "A STUDENT" will send us, under cover to our office, two
P.O. Orders for two pounds ten shillings each respectively, further
explanation than that conveyed by our receipt for the same will be
unnecessary.--ED.]

       *       *       *       *       *

A RIDDLE.

  I'm underneath your feet
  In the streets of London Town,
    From town take "t,"
    Then give it to me,
  And you'll sell me for a crown.

       *       *       *       *       *

MRS. R. AND THE PREVAILING EPIDEMIC.--Our excellent friend is now
convalescent. "Like CAESAR or CAESAR's wife, I forget which it was,"
she says, "I have passed the Barbican!" Some one having suggested that
probably she meant "the Rubicon," Mrs. R. thanked him politely, but
added, that she perfectly well knew what she was talking about, and
that everyone who was acquainted with history would understand her
classical delusion.

       *       *       *       *       *

PUZZLER FOR A COSTUMIER.--A Gentleman going to a Fancy Dress Ball
wants to know how he can make up for Lost Time?

       *       *       *       *       *

NAMES for the next pair of Tailed Monkeys sent to the Zoo--"Mr. and
Mrs. CAUDAL."

       *       *       *       *       *

N.B.--"Confessions of a Duffer," No. IV., next week.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: SHOWING THAT SOMETIMES IT IS GOOD FOR A COBBLER _NOT_
TO STICK TO HIS LAST.

_Fair Matron._ "I REMEMBER YOUR ACTING '_SIR ANTHONY,' YEARS_ AGO,
WHEN I WAS A GIRL, SIR CHARLES! YOU DID IT SPLENDIDLY!"

_The Great Mathematician._ "AH, WOULD YOU BELIEVE IT, THAT BIT OF
ACTING BROUGHT ME MORE COMPLIMENTS THAN ANYTHING I EVER DID?"

_Fair Matron._ "I SHOULD _THINK_, SO INDEED!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

TRUE AND TRUSTY.

(_A STORY OF THE LAW._)

I always liked LAWRENCE LUCKAPENNY, and shall never forget the first
time I met him. He was leaving the County Court, where I had had
myself a small matter of business, and knowing the same Counsel, we
foregathered. He was in great spirits. He had just won his case.

"Yes," said he, "it was a hard fight, but we came off all right. His
Honour was distinctly in our favour, so now I and my co-trustees will
have the satisfaction of feeling that the estate has benefited, with
no greater loss than a few months' delay. Eh?" and he turned to our
Counsel, who smiled, and shook his head a little doubtfully.

"Can scarcely go so far as that," the man of law observed. "You see,
these matters take time, and the other side may appeal."

"Appeal! What is that?"

"I am afraid you will have the full opportunity for learning, my dear
fellow."

"Well, it's all right up to now," cried LUCKAPENNY, cheerfully, and we
separated.

Two or three years after this I again met the litigant, but this time
in the Royal Courts of Justice. There were streaks of white in his
hair, but he was still cheerful.

I asked him how he was getting on with the matter, and he replied,
"As well as might be expected." Our Counsel had been right, for the
liquidators had appealed.

"But we have beaten them again, my dear Sir! Think of that,--beaten
them again!"

"And now you will have no further difficulty, I suppose."

"I can't go quite so far as that," returned LUCKAPENNY, who I noticed
was adopting legal phraseology. "You know they may take us up to the
House of Lords, if they please!"

And again time went on. In the course of years I found that poor
LUCKAPENNY _had_ been taken to Westminster, and their Lordships had
decided to give themselves time to consider their judgment.

When I met LUCKAPENNY again, the House of Lords had decided against
him.

"It is very awkward," he observed, "they will not allow my costs, and
so I shall have to pay them out of my own pocket! And what makes it
the more annoying is that, even had we won our cause, it would
have led to nothing, as the estate we were fighting is practically
bankrupt."

I offered my condolences, and we separated.

The last time, I saw poor LUCKAPENNY, he looked a very shadow of
himself. He was haggard and thin, and was wearing clothes of an
ancient cut and threadbare material. He smiled as he met me, and
observed that he was still engaged on the trust matter.

"But I have come to the last stage," he said; "I have paid the costs
in full. And now I am going home."

"Going home," I repeated, and noticing that he seemed feeble, offered
him the support of my arm. "I will walk as far as your residence."

"You are very good," he replied, "but I am afraid that I cannot ask
you to come in."

"Never mind that; but where do you live?"

"Where should I live after a lawsuit?" he returned, with a short
laugh. "Why, in the Workhouse, to be sure--in the Workhouse!"

And as a ratepayer, I have assisted to support him ever since!

       *       *       *       *       *

A MENU FROM BIRMINGHAM.

POTAGES.

Duchesse. Consomme de Deluge a l'Apres Moi.

POISSONS.

Hors d'Eau a l'Appat convenable. Crevettes a l'Envie.

ENTREES.

Petits Programmes a la Robe de Joseph. Filets de Vis, Sauce Monopole.
Pattes de Matou aux Griffes.

ROTS.

Moi Meme. Dinde Fidele de Jesse.

LEGUMES.

Orchis en Boutonniere. Hartijo Sauce Soumission.

RELEVES.

Monocle. Salmi de Paires Filants aux Lis.

ENTREMETS.

Gateau Rossendale. Conserves d'Eglise Galloise. Boudin de Labouchere a
la Lanterne.

DESSERT.

Bonbons de Famille. Hamecons de Flatterie. Oublis.

       *       *       *       *       *

IN STATU,--QUO?

Should CROMWELL have a statue at Westminster was a burning question
some years ago. We all know the result, and nowadays, who cares?
At present, the question at Oxford is, Shall Cardinal NEWMAN have a
statue? and, if so, Shall it be just opposite the Martyrs' Memorial?
From one point of view, the situation is happily selected, as, of
course, NEWMAN was on just exactly opposite ground to CRANMER, RIDLEY,
and LATIMER. The Oxford Dons are right in supposing that no statue
can be erected without a previous design; a design by a hand that has
not lost its cunning. The proposed site is in Broad Street, a very
suggestive name as opposed to narrowness of any sort; yet so eager
are the illogical Dons in the matter of preservation of spaces, that
before even the base of a clay model has been commenced, they have
already prepared the ground for the reception of the statue by getting
up any amount of railing about the proposed site!

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: "WAKING-UP" FOR THE OPENING OF THE SESSION.]

       *       *       *       *       *

LETTERS TO ABSTRACTIONS.

NO. X.--TO CROOKEDNESS.

OBLIQUE, BUT FORMIDABLE ONE,

You have frequently fixed your abode in high places. Are there
not recorded in history the names of kings and statesmen whom an
irresistible desire to scheme, and trick, and overreach, has brought
to the block? The times were difficult--that much one may admit. Noble
heads of honourable and upright men were lopped in profusion; and it
may be argued, with some show of reason, that the man whose character
was as flawless as pure crystal, was like to fare as badly as the
muddiest rascal of them all, if his side sank in defeat. And yet
I cannot help believing that, in some cases at least, a man might
have had a happier end if he had abstained from acts of political
turpitude, which were as irrational in their conception as they
were ruinous in their effect; acts, that is, which, in the existing
circumstances, no sane man could have undertaken unless the mere doing
of these rogueries had been a supreme and a necessary pleasure to him.
There was poor CHARLES THE FIRST. Surely, in spite of that melancholy,
doomed face, he might have died in peace if he had only played the
game fairly. JAMES THE SECOND, too, and MARLBOROUGH, the greatest
Captain of his age, and BOLINGBROKE, the eloquent philosophiser, the
grave moralist, how different might their ends have been had not you,
O CROOKEDNESS, presided at their births, and ruled their lives. But,
avaunt, History! Here I am straying into a treatise, when I merely
intended to remind you of little PETER SHEEF, and of his adventures.

[Illustration]

PETER and I were freshmen together at Cambridge in the remote past
before "Johnnies," and "Chappies," and "Mashers" had been heard of,
before the "oof bird" had been fledged in its pink and sporting nest,
or the Egyptian cigarette had asserted its universal sway. I daresay
we differed but little (by "we" I mean the freshmen of our year) from
those who have lately appeared for the first time in King's Parade, or
Jesus Lane. We were very young--we imagined Proctors to be destitute
of human feeling; we ate portentous breakfasts of many courses, and,
for the most part, treated our allowances as though they had been so
much pocket-money. Also we had an idea that a man who had passed his
thirtieth year was absurdly old, and that nobody could be called a
boy whose name had been entered on the books of a College. In fact,
we were freshmen.

PETER and I were a good deal thrown together during our first term.
Like me, he had come up from one of the smaller schools, and we had
not, therefore, a very large number of friends to start with. PETER
was one of the pleasantest fellows in the world, always cheerful,
good-tempered, and obliging. He always seemed to have plenty of money.
Indeed, I know that his father made him an allowance of L800 a year,
a sum which was considerably more than double that received by the
majority of his fellows. The parental SHEEF I have since discovered
was a Solicitor, who had made his mark and his fortune by the crafty
defence of shady financiers in distress, of bogus company promoters,
and generally of the great race who live in the narrow border-land
which divides the merely disreputable from the positively indictable.
But at that time I didn't trouble my head to inquire about PETER's
father, and was content as most Undergraduates are, to take my friends
as I thought I found them. PETER was musical; he played several
instruments with skill, and sang a capital song. With all these
qualities, he soon became, to a certain extent, popular. He then set
up as a giver of good and expensive dinners, kept a couple of horses
in the hunting season, devoted great attention to his dress, and made
himself unobtrusively agreeable to the little gods of our miniature
world. In his second year he had gained a position; most people spoke
well of him, and liked him. It only rested with PETER himself to
maintain what he had gained, and to enter on life with troops of
friends. A few moments of purposeless folly were sufficient to shatter
him.

I remember that in my first term I was not very agreeably impressed
by something that PETER did. A dog-fancier happened to come through
the street in which we both lodged, and PETER began to bargain with
him for a fox-terrier, who, according to the fancier's account, had
a pedigree as long and as illustrious as that of a Norman Peer.
Eventually it had been agreed that the dog was to become PETER's
property in consideration of thirty shillings in cash, a pair of
trousers, and a bottle of brandy. The exchange was made, and the man
departed. Thereupon PETER informed me with glee, that the trousers
were a pair of his father's, which had been packed in his portmanteau
by mistake, and that the brandy-bottle contained about fifty per cent.
of water, that amount of brandy having been poured off before payment
was made. As PETER put it, "I've done him in the eye, to prevent him
doing me." I tried in vain to bring him round to the opinion that (let
alone robbing one's father) cheating a cheat was one of the lowest
forms of roguery. The dog-fancier soon afterwards returned, and
protested, with tears in his eyes, that the shabby trick had wounded
him in his tenderest feelings, but he seemed quite willing to begin a
fresh bargain with "the only gen'lemen, s'help me, as ever bested pore
little ALEC."

All this is, however, by the way. I merely mention it to illustrate
PETER's character. At the University Steeple-Chase Meeting, which
took place at the end of our third October term, SHEEF had entered
his animals for several races. He was a good rider, and confidently
anticipated success. To celebrate the occasion, he had arranged a big
dinner-party, and had invited some twenty of us to dine with him. I
had been unable to go to the races myself, but at the appointed hour
I turned up at SHEEF's rooms. I found the table brilliantly laid,
waiters hanging about, and dozens of Champagne in readiness. SHEEF
was there, but, beside myself, no other guest had appeared. And not a
single one came. I forget what excuse the miserable host made, but the
result was that we two solemnly dined at a table laid for ten times
our number. I think I shall remember that ghastly festivity as long as
I live. The next day all Cambridge knew that SHEEF had not only pulled
one of his horses openly and disgracefully, but had wilfully misled
both his friends and the book-makers as to the horse he intended to
ride in a race for which entries were made at the post. I never heard
that he stood to win more than L50 by the transaction. And for this
paltry sum (paltry, that is, to a man of his means) he had wrecked his
reputation, and all the possibilities of his career.

I see him slinking about London sometimes. Last year he passed,
with much discredit, through the Bankruptcy Court. He has been a
Director of countless Companies, for the stock of fools seems to be
inexhaustible. There can only be one end for such a man as SHEEF. The
cool, callous, and calculating knave may get clear through to the end;
but SHEEF always was stupidly good-natured, and good-nature hangs like
a millstone round the neck of rascality. I cannot myself detest him as
I ought to do. He was so near to completely successful respectability.
But crookedness ruined him, in spite of his better wishes. Was it
altogether his own fault?

That, as Mr. BRET HARTE observes, lets me out.

I remain as before, DIOGENES ROBINSON.

       *       *       *       *       *

A DANGEROUS TITLE.

(_TO MR. JOSEPH HATTON, AUTHOR OF "CIGARETTE PAPERS."_)

  Cigarette Papers, JOSEPH, when properly stuffed,
  Are meant, I suppose, to be zealously puffed.
  When we take them in hand, a consuming desire
  Attacks us to set the gay trifles on fire.
  Yet, the brand being good (here's the point of my joke),
  They are always enjoyed ere they vanish in smoke.

       *       *       *       *       *

FROM AN X.J.P. TO LORD CHIEF JUSTICE PUNCH.--Sir,--Why complain of
"the Licence of the Bar?" Of course it goes with, and is a part of,
every Licence to a Public-house granted by the Middlesex Magistrates.
I've retired some years myself, am a bit deaf, and don't read much;
but I heard just enough to warrant me in writing to you at once on
what appears to me so simple a matter.

ROBERT SHALLOW, X.J.P., M.M.

_At the Sign of the Pig and Pippin._

       *       *       *       *       *

TO THE FUTURE A.R.A.--Better luck next time, Mr. SWAN. Be satisfied
that, though at present unelected, you are Swan, R.A., i.e., _Rara
Avis_. As you can plume yourself on this, so "_in hoc Cygno,
vinces!_" Which we caninecally and not canonically for the nonce
nonce-sensically render, "In this (matter), to the Swan (we say) you
will (go in and) win!"

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTICE.--Rejected Communications or Contributions, whether MS.,
Printed Matter, Drawings, or Pictures of any description, will in no
case be returned, not even when accompanied by a Stamped and Addressed
Envelope, Cover, or Wrapper. To this rule there will be no exception.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch, Or The London Charivari, Vol.
102, February 6, 1892, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH ***

***** This file should be named 14341.txt or 14341.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/4/3/4/14341/

Produced by Malcolm Farmer, William Flis, and the PG Online
Distributed Proofreading Team


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
