Project Gutenberg's Dew Drops, Vol. 37, No. 9, March 1, 1914, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Dew Drops, Vol. 37, No. 9, March 1, 1914

Author: Various

Release Date: March 29, 2005 [EBook #15494]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DEW DROPS, VOL. 37, NO. 9, ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Suzanne Lybarger and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.









DEW DROPS


VOL. 37. No. 9. WEEKLY.


DAVID C. COOK PUBLISHING CO., ELGIN, ILLINOIS.

GEORGE E. COOK, EDITOR.

MARCH 1, 1914.




How Lilian Helped Her Brother

By JULIA H. JOHNSTON


"May we go, mamma? Oh, do say yes. Please say yes."

Lilian and her brother Earl were invited to a children's lawn party,
and, as they were not different from most other children, they were very
anxious to attend.

"Lilian may go, but I am afraid to trust Earl," said mamma. "There will
certainly be ice cream and berries, cake and lemonade, and you know what
the doctor said, Earl. You think you are well, but you are not strong
after your illness and you are not to eat or drink anything ice-cold for
some time to come."

"But I needn't eat things because they are there," said Earl, "and I
promise you, mamma, that I won't."

"I'm sure he won't." Lilian added. "I don't care to go unless Earl can,
and I'll promise for him, too, that he'll be good."

"That means that you will be his security," said mamma, smiling. "You
will be a surety for him, as they call it, and give your own pledge that
Earl will do his duty. Well, then, if you both promise, I will let you
go. You must learn to do right, even if there is temptation to do
wrong."

So the loving brother and sister, who wished to go together, as brothers
and sisters should, went merrily off at the appointed time, and enjoyed
themselves with their playmates upon the lovely lawn.

As they went in together, Lilian said, "Now, remember, Earl, that when
we have things to eat, you must not take ice cream and lemonade."

"I'll remember," said Earl, and then, as it was a large party, the two
were soon separated. Lilian trusted her brother so fully that she did
not think it needful to speak to him again, and when refreshments were
served, she did not think of looking for him. As it happened, they were
far apart.

Earl was very warm. His mother had told him to be careful about playing
too hard, but when interested in a game, the boy did not realize how
fast and far he ran. When the tempting ice cream, with berries, cake and
lemonade were passed, he allowed himself to be helped with the rest,
thinking only how hot he was and how good the cold things would taste.
He had eaten half his cream and half emptied his glass before he really
thought of his promise. Then he stopped suddenly, feeling sorry and
distressed.

[Illustration: The ice cream and lemonade prove too big a temptation.]

"But what could I do?" he reasoned. "It would not be polite to ask for
just berries alone."

This was Earl's second mistake. The first was forgetting his promise,
the second in thinking true obedience could ever be impolite.

"I might as well finish now, for if it's going to hurt me it has
already, and the rest won't do any more harm."

Mistake number three. Why should any wrongdoing be finished? Suppose a
driver should say about a horse, "He has a pretty big load now and so I
might as well pile on as much more as I can," would it be no worse for
the horse? Earl was entirely wrong.

Of course he suffered for it. The doctor had to be sent for in the
night, and the next day, though better, he was ill and weak, and had to
stay in bed--something no boy was ever known to enjoy.

He had hoped that the simple remedies mamma gave him as soon as he
confessed what he had done, and began to feel ill, would undo the
mischief, but they did not. Earl had to bear the full consequences of
his broken promise.

"Dear Earl, I am so sorry you are sick," cried Lilian, when she came in
to see him the next morning.

Kneeling by the bed she put one arm under his aching head and threw the
other over his shoulder, while Earl put one arm lovingly about his
sister.

"I'm sorry, too," he said, "but really, Lilian, I'm sorrier that I did
wrong. Mamma is so sorry she trusted me, and she says maybe she ought
not to have let me go into temptation. She said that when we both
promised she felt sure, and so let us go. Isn't it mean not to keep a
promise when you're trusted?"

"I was mean not to help you keep yours, when I promised to," Lilian
said, not wishing to scold Earl when he was ill in bed. "Mamma says,"
she went on, "that when I went security for you it meant that I must
help you to keep your word as well as to say that I felt sure you would,
so I didn't do my part as I should, you see."

"You told me to remember," said Earl.

"But not at the right time," said wise Lilian. "I ought to have looked
to see if you remembered, when the time came. If I go your security
after this, and promise that you'll not forget, I'll watch and tell you
at the time."

"Do," said Earl. "You can think of things easier," which was true,
Lilian being older and more thoughtful.

So the sister promised to make it as sure as she could that her brother
would keep his promises after this. True, she sometimes forgot, herself,
and Earl was not always willing to do right, even when reminded, but
both were in earnest, and Lilian grew to be more and more of a help,
feeling the responsibility of being her brother's security. Who will
follow her example?




REAL FUN.


When Roy saw that Uncle Henry was in the shop getting the troughs and
pails ready for the spring sap running, he made up his mind to ask if he
couldn't go to the maple orchard with the men. He had heard them tell so
much about the happy days among the big maples that he had wanted to go
for a long while, and it seemed to Roy that he must be large enough this
year to take his turn at the sap gathering. He asked Uncle Henry about
it first.

"Can't I go to the sugar camp this year?"

Uncle Henry looked up from the buckets he was counting.

"Maybe you can! I'm ready enough to take you along for a week. But I
want to tell you right here how it isn't all fun up there in the sugar
camp. You hear us talking about the best side of those days, and we
don't say anything about the backaches and such as that!"

Roy was a little surprised to hear Uncle Henry speak like that, but he
was too brave to change his mind about going.

"There must be a lot of fun," he said, "and it's manly to do hard
things."

Uncle Henry nodded.

"So 'tis! That's more real fun than playing at easy ones! If your folks
are willing, get ready to start for the sugaring with me to-morrow
morning. The yoke your father used when he was a boy is hanging up in
the shop, and I guess your shoulders have grown broad enough to hold it
on!" laughed Uncle Henry.

The very next morning they started for the sugar camp far up on the side
of the mountain, and long before noontime they had built a fire in the
log shack, and Roy was out in the woods helping Uncle Henry tap the
maple trees.

Every minute after that was a busy one. The nights were crisp with
frost, and the days were full of spring sunshine. For hours and hours
each day Roy trudged through the snow wearing on his shoulders the yoke
which had a pail hanging from either end, and after each trip into the
woods he would turn two brimming pails of sap into the big kettle
boiling over the fire.

[Illustration: After each trip into the woods Roy would turn two
brimming pails of sap into the big kettle.]

Sometimes his legs ached, and he got tired tramping through the snow,
and one pair of mittens grew quite useless for the holes worn in them.
But he did not give up one bit of his share of the work.

For a whole week the sap ran freely, and then came the time for Roy to
leave the men and go home.

"I'm going to miss you a whole lot!" declared Uncle Henry.

Roy laughed happily. He was going down the mountain on the ox team which
was piled high with barrels of rich brown syrup.

"I'd like to stay!" he said. "I've learned about what you said before I
came: that it's more real fun doing hard things than 'tis to play at
easy ones!"

--_Written for Dew Drops by Ruby Holmes Martyn._




NEIGHBORS.


Bobby made the snow man. He had made snow men in the country, and he
knew how. He always made them by the gate, next to the big syringa bush.
He used to cut a stick from a tree for the snow man to hold, and he
generally placed a long chicken feather in its cap.

But in a city yard that was not even all your own yard, it was
different. Recently Bobby's father had come into town to live.

In the same street lived Joey Rodman, who was about Bobby's age. The
afternoon that Bobby made the snow man Joey kept throwing stones. Bobby
tried not to mind. There was lots of snow in the yard, and he made the
snow man unusually large. The other children helped him, but Joey kept
calling out and throwing things, and at last he knocked off the head of
the snow man just as Bobby had put in two bits of coal for the eyes.

Bobby could not stand that. He ran after Joey, and Joey dodged and
began to call him names. Joey's sister, Sadie, who cared for the six
children, heard the noise in the yard below.

"Do you think it's your yard?" she called out to Bobby. "It is just as
much Joey's yard as it is yours!"

Then Bobby's mother opened her window. "Come in, Bobby!" she said; and
when Bobby left the snow man and climbed upstairs, she said, "Son, we
mustn't quarrel with our neighbors, you know."

"But Joey threw stones--"

"Never mind," said mother. "We won't talk about that. Perhaps we'll get
to be friends with Joey after a while. And you remember about coals of
fire."

That was mother's rule. Bobby knew that text about coals of fire so
well!

"But I don't see how you could ever make coals of fire out of a snow
man, mother!" he said. And then mother laughed, and he laughed, too.

After a while, Joey and the other children ran out into the street to
play. Bobby went down and finished the snow man with no one to trouble
him. He put on the head again, and placed an old broom under its arm. He
put it in very tight, so that no one could take it out easily.

Joey's sister, Sadie, was bringing things out to the roof of the
two-story extension. It was a tin roof, and sloped a bit. Suddenly her
foot slipped, and she lost her balance. She clutched at a clothesline,
but it snapped. Down she came, and Bobby stood speechless with fright.

But the snow man--the heroic snow man--was there to save her. Standing
firm and erect, he received the shock of Sadie's fall. It was too much
for his head. He lost that first, and then, as he went all to pieces, he
made a pillow for Sadie. Bobby ran forward.

"Oh, oh, I never will say a word against that boy!" she said, sitting up
in the snow. "His snow man has saved me!" Bobby's mother came running
downstairs and out into the yard.

"You poor child!" she said. "But I don't believe there's a bone broken.
Come right in and I'll give you a cup of hot tea."

Sadie came, and Bobby followed. Behind him came Joey, and the two boys
lingered round while the tea was made. Sadie drank it, and smiled at
Bobby's mother.

"We're neighbors. I always like my neighbors, and I want to help them if
I can," said Bobby's mother.

"Well, you can count me as a neighbor who likes you," said Sadie. "Come
along, Joey--and mind you behave to Bobby like a good neighbor, too."

Bobby climbed into his mother's lap after they had gone upstairs. "Coals
of snow are all right," he whispered in her ear.

--_Selected._




     "The thing that goes the farthest
       Toward making life worth while,
     That costs the least and does the most,
       Is just a pleasant smile."




O SANNA SAN.


O Sanna San was a little Japanese girl whose home was among the
mountains of North Japan. Now because Japan is called the Flowery
Kingdom we are apt to think of it as a country where the sun always
shines and flowers are always in blossom. But in the northern part,
where O Sanna San lived, they have winter, and cold, and in January and
February the snow is three and four feet deep; the rivers and canals are
frozen over, the people wear wadded clothes, and many of them go about
on snowshoes.

But O Sanna San would not go about, for she had fallen and hurt her back
so badly that she could not walk at all. Her father and mother were
Christians, and one day when a missionary came to their house he told
them about the hospital in the city, some thirty miles away, and that if
they would take O Sanna San there she might be cured.

So it was that as O Sanna San looked out one snowy morning she saw her
father coming over the snow with a sleigh, which was like a little house
on runners, with a roof, a window and a door. Her mother told her it was
to take her to the hospital to see if she could be made well again.

Then they wrapped O Sanna San warm, and laid her in the sleigh, and her
father put the ropes from the runners over his shoulders, took the pole
in his hand, and away they went. In many places in Japan when one
travels one must be either pulled or pushed by a man.

[Illustration: O Sanna San's father takes her to the hospital.]

All day he drew her over the snow, till they came to the city and
hospital. Forlorn enough O Sanna San felt when her father left her among
strangers, kind though they were. And when they laid her on one of the
hospital beds she was dreadfully frightened, because she had never even
seen a bed before, but had always slept on a mat on the floor, and she
did not dare to move for fear she would fall off.

The days that came after were still worse, for the doctor put her in a
plaster cast, so she had to lie straight and stiff like a wooden doll,
and she was so homesick she could hardly speak, and her big black eyes
were full of tears most of the time. But one day a little girl came down
between the white beds and stopped at hers. O Sanna San had never seen
anyone like her before; for her eyes were blue, her hair yellow, and her
skin was not brown, but pink and white.

"I am Frances," she said, "my papa is the doctor. He told me about you,
so I have brought you my doll and a picture book."

"I shall love the doll," said O Sanna San, "but I cannot read, there is
no school in our village."

"Never mind," Frances smiled, "I am coming to see you every day, and I
will teach you to read. My papa says you will soon be able to walk
again, then you shall go with me to the Plum Blossom school for girls."

O Sanna San's eyes were shining. "Oh, I shall not be homesick any more."

--_Written for Dew Drops by Adele E. Thompson._




SAM'S LITTLE DOG.


"Mother," cried Sam, raising his tousled head up from his no less
tousled pillow, "I had the funniest dream you ever heard."

"Well," said mother, drawing the comb through her long brown hair, "I'll
give you just five minutes to tell it in; then you must jump up quickly
and run over to the bathroom."

"It seems to me I was dreaming it all night," said Sam, "but I believe I
can tell it in less than five minutes: I thought I was going along, and
a little black dog was following me. As long as I kept walking on
straight ahead he trotted on behind me like a lamb, but every time I got
out of the path, and tried to cross the fields, he barked and snapped at
me till I came back to the path.

"I got tired staying in the path, so I dashed out on one side presently,
but the doggie barked so furiously that I got scared and climbed a
little tree. Just as I got to the top, the tree broke off at the roots
and 'down came Sammy, tree top and all.' The fall woke me, and I found I
had rolled out of bed. Wasn't that a funny dream?"

"Sam," said his mother, who had been much interested in his dream,
"don't you wish you had a little dog to go around with you and bark when
you went out of the right way?"

"I don't know, mother," answered Sam, doubtfully; "maybe I don't."

"I hoped you would say you did," said mother, looking disappointed, "and
I was going to tell you that conscience was that very little dog, and if
you tried to get away from conscience's barks, either up a tree or
elsewhere, you would certainly fall and come to grief. Time's up, little
boy; hie off to the bathroom."

--_Selected._




+---------------+
|               |
| Knowledge Box |
|               |
+---------------+

How Eskimo Dogs Sleep on a Journey


You have heard a great deal, very likely, about Eskimo dogs that haul
the sledges over the snow in Alaska. Have you ever heard what becomes of
them at night, when the traveler must stop in a snowstorm? Would you
like to hear?

When the traveler with his guides must stop, the sledge is turned up,
and the men get into their fur sleeping-bags, and lie down under such
protection as it offers, if there is nothing better. But the dogs are
all turned loose. You would think that there was danger of not finding
them in the morning, but there is no danger of that at all. When it is
time to get up next day, the guides look around, and see as many snow
mounds as there are dogs in the train, and in each mound where a dog has
burrowed, and let the snow cover him, is a hole made by his breath. It
is very easy to find the dogs by these holes, and they never go far from
the sledge.

--_Written for Dew Drops by Julia H. Johnston._




JUDY'S REVENGE

By Dorothy Hartley

[Illustration]


It was very evident that Judy was in trouble. There she stood in the
middle of the yard, her tiny brows drawn together in a pucker, one
finger resting between her rosy lips in a way that would have been
irresistibly lovely if the lips had been smiling instead of pouting, her
eyes cast down on the ground at her feet.

"I sha'n't! I sha'n't!" she kept saying every now and again, with a
shake of her short, sturdy self.

"Judiet, come here!" called her mother from the kitchen, where she was
making a pie for dinner. "Why, what's the matter, child?" she added, as
she saw the very evident traces of displeasure on her little daughter's
face.

"It's Tom, and I'll never forgive him!" she cried.

"Hush! hush! you mustn't say that, Judy. What has Tom been doing?"

"He's gone off playing, and he wouldn't let me go with him, and Daisy's
gone with her brother."

"But perhaps Tom has gone some place where it would be too far for you
to walk," said Mrs. Tewsbury, as she sliced the apples into the dish.

"He's only gone to watch the boys fly their kites, and he said I should
stay home and play with my dolls. But I sha'n't!"

"Well, Judy, I want you to go to the store for me, and then, when you
come back, we'll talk about Tom. There, run along now. Get the basket
and bring me two pounds of sugar."

Judy started on her errand, her little heart very sore against the
brother who rarely found time to make things pleasant for his sister.
Tom always had something he wanted to do when Judy asked him to help
her. He had felt a little prick as he went off that morning, when he
remembered that George Brown had promised to take his sister with him to
the top of the hill. "Oh, Judy couldn't walk so far!" he tried to
comfort himself by saying. "I'll take her to some other place another
day." But Master Tom knew he was making a promise to himself that he was
not likely to keep.

And so Judy went to the store, and by the time she returned home she did
not feel quite so angry with Tom. Perhaps her mother hoped this would be
the case when she sent her little daughter. It is always well to wait
and think when one feels angry, before saying things that afterward one
will be sorry for having spoken.

"Judy, I've been thinking," said Mrs. Tewsbury, as the girl entered the
kitchen, "that we'll teach Tom a lesson. Shall we?"

"What kind of a lesson, mamma?" asked Judy.

"A good lesson, of course. Now, when he comes home he'll expect to find
you cross, and perhaps sulky with him. Suppose, instead, he finds you
smiling and with a nice little apple turnover that you have made for
him; what do you suppose he will think? Why, that you are too good a
girl to be treated so badly; and, perhaps, too, if he sees you smiling
and loving, he will realize how much better it is to be that way than
selfish as he has been."

"Oh, mamma!" And now there were no frowns on Judy's rosy, dimpled face;
nothing but smiles. To make a turnover was a delightful treat in itself.
But to help Tom to be a nice boy was more of a satisfaction. So the
little girl started to work, and under her mother's tuition soon had a
very wonderful-looking turnover made and baked.

[Illustration: The frowns had all left.]

"I'd most like to put salt in instead of sugar, just to pay Tom up,"
Judy thought to herself; and then a better feeling came to her and she
added: "Oh, no. I wouldn't, 'cause that wouldn't be right. I want Tom to
think I'm as nice as Daisy's brother thinks she is."

Master Tom came home whistling shortly after the dainty had been removed
from the oven. He thought Judy would be waiting for him with angry
words. So she was waiting for him, but with a beautiful smile, a rosy
face, and on a plate in her hand what seemed to Tom a very delicious
tit-bit.

"I made it--made it for you, all by myself. Mamma said I could."

"Oh, Judy! And I wouldn't take you with me!" exclaimed Tom regretfully.

"But you will next time, if I'm good; won't you, Tom?" said Judy,
coaxingly.

"As true as my name's Tom Tewsbury. I say, Judy, it was good of you to
make this for me, when I don't deserve it, but I won't forget it of
you."

And Judy felt well paid for her turnover.




HELPFUL AND HAPPY.


     "I am so little!" sighed Helen,
       "Tell me, dear mamma, the way,
     How to make somebody happy;
       How to be helpful each day."

     Mamma replied: "To be helpful,
       Be of a sweet, willing mood;
     And, to make somebody happy.
       Little girls need to be good."

_Written for Dew Drops by Eugene C. Dolson._




OUR LESSON.--For March 1.

       *       *       *       *       *

PREPARED BY MARGUERITE COOK.

       *       *       *       *       *

Title.--Trusting in Riches and Trusting in God.--Luke 12: 13-34.

Golden Text.--Where your treasure is, there will your heart be
also.--Luke 12: 34.

_Beginners Golden Text._--_He careth for you._--1 Peter 5:7.

Truth.--The wise lay up for themselves treasures in heaven.

1. Jesus wished to show the people the danger of caring too much for
money or the things of this life, so he told them this parable or story.

[Illustration]

2. He said the ground of a certain rich man brought forth very large
harvests.

[Illustration]

3. The man had so many good things he did not know where to put them.

4. He did not share with his poorer neighbors.

5. He forgot that God gave him all his good things.

6. He made up his mind to keep all he had for himself.

7. He said he would pull down his barns and build larger ones.

[Illustration]

8. He planned to store his wealth in these larger barns, and having
nothing else to do would eat, drink, and be merry.

[Illustration]

9. He was a foolish, selfish man, and his plans were all spoiled.

10. That night God called for his soul, and he had to leave all his
wealth.

11. He was very poor in God's sight, for his wealth was not of the kind
that he could take beyond the grave.

12. It is foolish for us to love money too much, for if we do, we may
neglect our souls while we are trying to get more of it.

13. Our souls are worth more than the whole world.

       *       *       *       *       *

QUESTIONS.

What is the Golden Text?

What is the Truth?

1. What did Jesus wish to show the people?

2. What did he say about the rich man's ground?

3. About what was the rich man troubled?

4. What did he fail to do?

5. What did he forget?

6. What did he make up his mind to do?

7. What did he say he would build?

8. What kind of a life did he plan to lead?

9. What became of his plans?

10. What happened that very night?

11. In whose sight was he poor?

12. Why is it foolish for us to love money very much?

13. How much are our souls worth?

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON HYMN.

_Tune_--"Jesus loves me, this I know," omitting chorus (E flat).

     Jesus, help us all to see
     That it's better far to be
     Rich in all that's good and kind,
     Than to worldly riches find.

       *       *       *       *       *

Title of Lesson for March 8.

Watchfulness (Temperance Lesson).--Luke 12:35-48.

       *       *       *       *       *

Golden Text for March 8.

Blessed are those servants, whom the lord when he cometh shall find
watching.--Luke 12:37.

       *       *       *       *       *

Beginners Golden Text for March 8.

_Even a child maketh himself known by his doings._--Prov. 20:11.




+----------------------+
|                      |
| Thoughts for Mothers |
|                      |
+----------------------+

Teach Politeness.


Mothers, do you ever impress upon your children the fact that they ought
to show true politeness to everyone? Do not let them show rudeness at
home, and then expect them to be polite in company. Politeness is not
inborn, it has to be cultivated. It is a singular fact that parents
allow their children to treat their brothers and sisters with little or
no respect; this is one great cause of inharmony in many homes. Some
parents think that to have their children pay too much attention to the
rules of politeness, is apt to make them too formal. Better a little
formality than actual rudeness.

If there is any place in the world where true politeness and
consideration should be shown, it is at home, and a parent cannot begin
too early to teach such acts to a child. Remember that true politeness
begins in the heart: "Out of the fullness of the heart, the mouth
speaketh."

An earnest desire to "do unto others as I would that they should do unto
me," should be a child's motive power to impel to acts of kindness and
politeness. See that the heart is kept right, and your child will be
truly polite.




+--------------------------+
|                          |
| Advice to Boys and Girls |
|                          |
+--------------------------+

A Welcome Little Guest.


Eloise had been visiting at the home of her mother's girlhood friend,
and the latter said to the little girl when she was leaving: "I hope
your mother will allow you to come soon again; it has been such a
pleasure having you with us."

Eloise is just turned eight years old, and perhaps you wonder how she
made herself a welcome guest; it would doubtless seem that when so young
a girl goes visiting without her mother, she might be more of a care
than a pleasure. In the first place, Eloise was careful not to go
farther than the end of the block when she went outdoors to play; the
end of the block was as far as Mrs. Dawson could see from the
sitting-room window and, as she said she did not want Eloise out of her
sight, Eloise took pains to remain within it. When either Mr. or Mrs.
Dawson asked her to sing one of her dear little songs, she did so
willingly, though it was very hard to sing the first time before Mr.
Dawson who was a complete stranger to her. In short, whatever Eloise
could do to please her hostess, she did, and she tried to leave undone
the things she thought would not please her. Perhaps Eloise did not
think of it that way, but she just followed the Golden Rule, and it is a
very good rule to follow, either at home or when visiting, or, indeed,
at any time.

--_Written for Dew Drops by Marie Deacon Hanson._




It is good to see the way a brave, manly boy goes through the day,
shirking no duty, but doing cheerfully whatever his hand finds to do.




[Entered at the Post Office at Elgin, Ill., as Second Class Mail
Matter.]

Price of Dew Drops.--In lots of five or more, to one address, 20 cents
per copy per year, or 5-1/2 cents per copy per quarter. Address,

DAVID C. COOK PUBLISHING CO., ELGIN, ILL.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Dew Drops, Vol. 37, No. 9, March 1,
1914, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DEW DROPS, VOL. 37, NO. 9, ***

***** This file should be named 15494.txt or 15494.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/5/4/9/15494/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Suzanne Lybarger and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
