The Project Gutenberg eBook, Fishing with a Worm, by Bliss Perry


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: Fishing with a Worm


Author: Bliss Perry



Release Date: July 27, 2005  [eBook #16369]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FISHING WITH A WORM***


E-text prepared by Michael Gray (Lost_Gamer@comcast.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 16369-h.htm or 16369-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/6/3/6/16369/16369-h/16369-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/6/3/6/16369/16369-h.zip)





FISHING WITH A WORM

by

BLISS PERRY

Boston and New York
Houghton Mifflin Company

MDCCCCXVI






FISHING WITH A WORM

   "The last fish I caught was with a worm."--IZAAK WALTON.

A defective logic is the born fisherman's portion. He is a pattern of
inconsistency. He does the things which he ought not to do, and he
leaves undone the things which other people think he ought to do. He
observes the wind when he should be sowing, and he regards the clouds,
with temptation tugging familiarly at his heartstrings, when he might
be grasping the useful sickle. It is a wonder that there is so much
health in him. A sorrowing political economist remarked to me in early
boyhood, as a jolly red-bearded neighbor, followed by an abnormally fat
dog, sauntered past us for his nooning: "That man is the best carpenter
in town, but he will leave the most important job whenever he wants to
go fishing." I stared at the sinful carpenter, who swung along
leisurely in the May sunshine, keeping just ahead of his dog. To leave
one's job in order to go fishing! How illogical!

Years bring the reconciling mind. The world grows big enough to include
within its scheme both the instructive political economist and the
truant mechanic. But that trick of truly logical behavior seems harder
to the man than to the child. For example, I climbed up to my den under
the eaves last night--a sour, black sea-fog lying all about, and the
December sleet crackling against the window-panes--in order to varnish
a certain fly-rod. Now rods ought to be put in order in September, when
the fishing closes, or else in April, when it opens. To varnish a rod
in December proves that one possesses either a dilatory or a childishly
anticipatory mind. But before uncorking the varnish bottle, it occurred
to me to examine a dog-eared, water-stained fly-book, to guard against
the ravages of possible moths. This interlude proved fatal to the
varnishing. A half hour went happily by in rearranging the flies. Then,
with a fisherman's lack of sequence, as I picked out here and there a
plain snell-hook from the gaudy feathered ones, I said to myself with a
generous glow at the heart: "Fly-fishing has had enough sacred poets
celebrating it already. Is n't there a good deal to be said, after all,
for fishing with a worm?"

Could there be a more illogical proceeding? And here follows the
treatise,--a Defense of Results, an Apology for Opportunism,--conceived
in agreeable procrastination, devoted to the praise of the
inconsequential angleworm, and dedicated to a childish memory of a
whistling carpenter and his fat dog.

Let us face the worst at the very beginning. It shall be a shameless
example of fishing under conditions that make the fly a mockery. Take
the Taylor Brook, "between the roads," on the headwaters of the
Lamoille. The place is a jungle. The swamp maples and cedars were
felled a generation ago, and the tops were trimmed into the brook. The
alders and moosewood are higher than your head; on every tiny knoll the
fir balsams have gained a footing, and creep down, impenetrable, to the
edge of the water. In the open spaces the Joe-Pye weed swarms. In two
minutes After leaving the upper road you have scared a mink or a
rabbit, and you have probably lost the brook. Listen! It is only a
gurgle here, droning along, smooth and dark, under the tangle of
cedar-tops and the shadow of the balsams. Follow the sound cautiously.
There, beyond the Joe-Pye weed, and between the stump and the cedar-top,
is a hand's breadth of black water. Fly-casting is impossible in this
maze of dead and living branches. Shorten your line to two feet, or even
less, bait your hook with a worm, and drop it gingerly into that
gurgling crevice of water. Before it has sunk six inches, if there is
not one of those black-backed, orange-bellied, Taylor Brook trout
fighting with it, something is wrong with your worm or with you. For
the trout are always there, sheltered by the brushwood that makes this
half mile of fishing "not worth while." Below the lower road the Taylor
Brook becomes uncertain water. For half a mile it yields only
fingerlings, for no explainable reason; then there are two miles of
clean fishing through the deep woods, where the branches are so high
that you can cast a fly again if you like, and there are long pools,
where now and then a heavy fish will rise; then comes a final half mile
through the alders, where you must wade, knee to waist deep, before you
come to the bridge and the river. Glorious fishing is sometimes to be
had here,--especially if you work down the gorge at twilight, casting a
white miller until it is too dark to see. But alas, there is a
well-worn path along the brook, and often enough there are the very
footprints of the "fellow ahead of you," signs as disheartening to the
fisherman as ever were the footprints on the sand to Robinson Crusoe.

But "between the roads" it is "too much trouble to fish;" and there
lies the salvation of the humble fisherman who disdains not to use the
crawling worm, nor, for that matter, to crawl himself, if need be, in
order to sneak under the boughs of some overhanging cedar that casts a
perpetual shadow upon the sleepy brook. Lying here at full length, with
no elbow-room to manage the rod, you must occasionally even unjoint
your tip, and fish with that, using but a dozen inches of line, and not
letting so much as your eyebrows show above the bank. Is it a becoming
attitude for a middle-aged citizen of the world? That depends upon how
the fish are biting. Holing a put looks rather ridiculous also, to the
mere observer, but it requires, like brook-fishing with a tip only, a
very delicate wrist, perfect tactile sense, and a fine disregard of
appearances.

There are some fishermen who always fish as if they were being
photographed. The Taylor Brook "between the roads" is not for them. To
fish it at all is back-breaking, trouser-tearing work; to see it
thoroughly fished is to learn new lessons in the art of angling. To
watch R., for example, steadily filling his six-pound creel from that
unlikely stream, is like watching Sargent paint a portrait. R. weighs
two hundred and ten. Twenty years ago he was a famous amateur pitcher,
and among his present avocations are violin playing, which is good for
the wrist, taxidermy, which is good for the eye, and shooting woodcock,
which before the days of the new Nature Study used to be thought good
for the whole man. R. began as a fly-fisherman, but by dint of passing
his summers near brooks where fly-fishing is impossible, he has become
a stout-hearted apologist for the worm. His apparatus is most singular.
It consists of a very long, cheap rod, stout enough to smash through
bushes, and with the stiffest tip obtainable. The lower end of the
butt, below the reel, fits into the socket of a huge extra butt of
bamboo, which R. carries unconcernedly. To reach a distant hole, or to
fish the lower end of a ripple, R. simply locks his reel, slips on the
extra butt, and there is a fourteen-foot rod ready for action. He
fishes with a line unbelievably short, and a Kendal hook far too big;
and when a trout jumps for that hook, R. wastes no time in manoeuvring
for position. The unlucky fish is simply "derricked,"--to borrow a word
from Theodore, most saturnine and profane of Moosehead guides.

"Shall I play him awhile?" shouted an excited sportsman to Theodore,
after hooking his first big trout.

"----no!" growled Theodore in disgust. "Just derrick him right into the
canoe!" A heroic method, surely; though it once cost me the best
square-tail I ever hooked, for Theodore had forgotten the landing-net,
and the gut broke in his fingers as he tried to swing the fish aboard.
But with these lively quarter-pounders of the Taylor Brook, derricking
is a safer procedure. Indeed, I have sat dejectedly on the far end of a
log, after fishing the hole under it in vain, and seen the mighty R.
wade downstream close behind me, adjust that comical extra butt, and
jerk a couple of half-pound trout from under the very log on which I
was sitting. His device on this occasion, as I well remember, was to
pass his hook but once through the middle of a big worm, let the worm
sink to the bottom, and crawl along it at his leisure. The trout could
not resist.

Once, and once only, have I come near equaling R.'s record, and the way
he beat me then is the justification for a whole philosophy of
worm-fishing. We were on this very Taylor Brook, and at five in the
afternoon both baskets were two thirds full. By count I had just one
more fish than he. It was raining hard. "You fish down through the
alders," said R. magnanimously. "I 'll cut across and wait for you at
the sawmill. I don't want to get any wetter, on account of my
rheumatism."

This was rather barefaced kindness,--for whose rheumatism was ever the
worse for another hour's fishing? But I weakly accepted it. I coveted
three or four good trout to top off with,--that was all. So I tied on a
couple of flies, and began to fish the alders, wading waist deep in the
rapidly rising water, down the long green tunnel under the curving
boughs. The brook fairly smoked with the rain, by this time, but when
did one fail to get at least three or four trout out of this best half
mile of the lower brook? Yet I had no luck I tried one fly after
another, and then, as a forlorn hope,--though it sometimes has a magic
of its own,--I combined a brown hackle for the tail fly with a twisting
worm on the dropper. Not a rise! I thought of E. sitting patiently in
the saw mill, and I fished more conscientiously than ever.

  "Venture as warily, use the same skill,
   Do your best, whether winning or losing it,
   If you choose to play!--is my principle."

Even those lines, which by some subtle telepathy of the trout brook
murmur themselves over and over to me in the waning hours of an unlucky
day, brought now no consolation. There was simply not one fish to be
had, to any fly in the book, out of that long, drenching, darkening
tunnel. At last I climbed out of the brook, by the bridge. R. was
sitting on the fence, his neck and ears carefully turtled under his
coat collar, the smoke rising and the rain dripping from the inverted
bowl of his pipe. He did not seem to be worrying about his rheumatism.

"What luck?" he asked.

"None at all," I answered morosely. "Sorry to keep you waiting."

"That's all right," remarked R. "What do you think I 've been doing? I
've been fishing out of the saw-mill window just to kill time. There
was a patch of floating sawdust there,--kind of unlikely place for
trout, anyway,--but I thought I'd put on a worm and let him crawl
around a little." He opened his creel as he spoke. "But I did n't look
for a pair of 'em," he added. And there, on top of his smaller fish,
were as pretty a pair of three-quarter-pound brook trout as were ever
basketed.

"I 'm afraid you got pretty wet," said R. kindly.

"I don't mind that," I replied. And I didn't. What I minded was the
thought of an hour's vain wading in that roaring stream, whipping
it with fly after fly, while R., the foreordained fisherman, was
sitting comfortably in a sawmill, and derricking that pair of
three-quarter-pounders in through the window! I had ventured more
warily than he, and used, if not the same skill, at least the best
skill at my command. My conscience was clear, but so was his; and he
had had the drier skin and the greater magnanimity and the biggest
fish besides. There is much to be said, in a world like ours, for
taking the world as you find it and for fishing with a worm.

One's memories of such fishing, however agreeable they may be, are not
to be identified with a defense of the practice. Yet, after all, the
most effective defense of worm-fishing is the concrete recollection of
some brook that could be fished best or only in that way, or the image
of a particular trout that yielded to the temptation of an angleworm
after you had flicked fly after fly over him in vain. Indeed, half the
zest of brook fishing is in your campaign for "individuals,"--as the
Salvation Army workers say,--not merely for a basketful of fish qua
fish, but for a series of individual trout which your instinct tells
you ought to lurk under that log or be hovering in that ripple. How to
get him, by some sportsmanlike process, is the question. If he will
rise to some fly in your book, few fishermen will deny that the fly is
the more pleasurable weapon. Dainty, luring, beautiful toy, light as
thistle-down, falling where you will it to fall, holding when the
leader tightens and sings like the string of a violin, the artificial
fly represents the poetry of angling. Given the gleam of early morning
on some wide water, a heavy trout breaking the surface as he curves and
plunges, with the fly holding well, with the right sort of rod in your
fingers, and the right man in the other end of the canoe, and you
perceive how easy is that Emersonian trick of making the pomp of
emperors ridiculous.

But angling's honest prose, as represented by the lowly worm, has also
its exalted moments. "The last fish I caught was with a worm," says the
honest Walton, and so say I. It was the last evening of last August.
The dusk was settling deep upon a tiny meadow, scarcely ten rods from
end to end. The rank bog grass, already drenched with dew, bent over
the narrow, deep little brook so closely that it could not be fished
except with a double-shotted, baited hook, dropped delicately between
the heads of the long grasses. Underneath this canopy the trout were
feeding, taking the hook with a straight downward tug, as they made for
the hidden bank. It was already twilight when I began, and before I
reached the black belt of woods that separated the meadow from the
lake, the swift darkness of the North Country made it impossible to see
the hook. A short half hour's fishing only, and behold nearly twenty
good trout derricked into a basket until then sadly empty. Your
rigorous fly-fisherman would have passed that grass-hidden brook in
disdain, but it proved a treasure for the humble. Here, indeed, there
was no question of individually-minded fish, but simply a neglected
brook, full of trout which could be reached with the baited hook only.
In more open brook-fishing it is always a fascinating problem to decide
how to fish a favorite pool or ripple, for much depends upon the hour
of the day, the light, the height of water, the precise period of the
spring or summer. But after one has decided upon the best theoretical
procedure, how often the stupid trout prefers some other plan! And when
you have missed a fish that you counted upon landing, what solid
satisfaction is still possible for you, if you are philosopher enough
to sit down then and there, eat your lunch, smoke a meditative pipe,
and devise a new campaign against that particular fish! To get another
rise from him after lunch is a triumph of diplomacy, to land him is
nothing short of statesmanship. For sometimes he will jump furiously at
a fly, for very devilishness, without ever meaning to take it, and
then, wearying suddenly of his gymnastics, he will snatch sulkily at a
grasshopper, beetle, or worm. Trout feed upon an extraordinary variety
of crawling things, as all fishermen know who practice the useful habit
of opening the first two or three fish they catch, to see what food is
that day the favorite. But here, as elsewhere in this world, the best
things lie nearest, and there is no bait so killing, week in and week
out, as your plain garden or golf-green angleworm.

Walton's list of possible worms is impressive, and his directions for
placing them upon the hook have the placid completeness that belonged
to his character. Yet in such matters a little nonconformity may be
encouraged. No two men or boys dig bait in quite the same way, though
all share, no doubt, the singular elation which gilds that grimy
occupation with the spirit of romance. The mind is really occupied, not
with the wriggling red creatures in the lumps of earth, but with the
stout fish which each worm may capture, just as a saint might rejoice
in the squalor of this world as a preparation for the glories of the
world to come. Nor do any two experienced fishermen hold quite the same
theory as to the best mode of baiting the hook. There are a hundred
ways, each of them good. As to the best hook for worm-fishing, you will
find dicta in every catalogue of fishing tackle, but size and shape and
tempering are qualities that should vary with the brook, the season,
and the fisherman. Should one use a three-foot leader, or none at all?
Whose rods are best for bait-fishing, granted that all of them should
be stiff enough in the tip to lift a good fish by dead strain from a
tangle of brush or logs? Such questions, like those pertaining to the
boots or coat which one should wear, the style of bait-box one should
carry, or the brand of tobacco best suited for smoking in the wind, are
topics for unending discussion among the serious minded around the
camp-fire. Much edification is in them, and yet they are but prudential
maxims after all. They are mere moralities of the Franklin or
Chesterfield variety, counsels of worldly wisdom, but they leave the
soul untouched. A man may have them at his finger's ends and be no
better fisherman at bottom; or he may, like R., ignore most of the
admitted rules and come home with a full basket. It is a sufficient
defense of fishing with a worm to pronounce the truism that no man is a
_complete_ angler until he has mastered all the modes of angling.
Lovely streams, lonely and enticing, but impossible to fish with a fly,
await the fisherman who is not too proud to use, with a man's skill,
the same unpretentious tackle which he began with as a boy.



But ah, to fish with a worm, and then not catch your fish! To fail with
a fly is no disgrace: your art may have been impeccable, your patience
faultless to the end. But the philosophy of worm-fishing is that of
Results, of having something tangible in your basket when the day's
work is done. It is a plea for Compromise, for cutting the coat
according to the cloth, for taking the world as it actually is. The
fly-fisherman is a natural Foe of Compromise. He throws to the trout a
certain kind of lure; an they will take it, so; if not, adieu. He knows
no middle path.

  "This high man, aiming at a million,
   Misses an unit."

The raptures and the tragedies of consistency are his. He is a scorner
of the ground. All honor to him! When he comes back at nightfall and
says happily, "I have never cast a line more perfectly than I have
to-day," it is almost indecent to peek into his creel. It is like
rating Colonel Newcome by his bank account.

But the worm-fisherman is no such proud and isolated soul. He is a "low
man" rather than a high one; he honestly cares what his friends will
think when they look into his basket to see what he has to show for his
day's sport. He watches the Foe of Compromise men go stumbling forward
and superbly falling, while he, with less inflexible courage, manages
to keep his feet. He wants to score, and not merely to give a pretty
exhibition of base-running. At the Harvard-Yale football game of 1903
the Harvard team showed superior strength in rushing the ball; they
carried it almost to the Yale goal line repeatedly, but they could not,
for some reason, take it over. In the instant of absolute need, the
Yale line held, and when the Yale team had to score in order to win,
they scored. As the crowd streamed out of the Stadium, a veteran
Harvard alumnus said: "This news will cause great sorrow in one home I
know of, until they learn by to-morrow's papers that the Harvard team
_acquitted itself creditably_." Exactly. Given one team bent upon
acquitting itself creditably, and another team determined to win, which
will be victorious? The stay-at-homes on the Yale campus that day were
not curious to know whether their team was acquitting itself
creditably, but whether it was winning the game. Every other question
than that was to those young Philistines merely a fine-spun
irrelevance. They took the Cash and let the Credit go.

There is much to be said, no doubt, for the Harvard veteran's point of
view. The proper kind of credit may be a better asset for eleven boys
than any championship; and to fish a bit of water consistently and
skillfully, with your best flies and in your best manner, is perhaps
achievement enough. So says the Foe of Compromise, at least. But the
Yale spirit will be prying into the basket in search of fish; it
prefers concrete results. If all men are by nature either Platonists or
Aristotelians, fly-fishermen or worm-fishermen, how difficult it is for
us to do one another justice! Differing in mind, in aim and method, how
shall we say infallibly that this man or that is wrong? To fail with
Plato for companion may be better than to succeed with Aristotle. But
one thing is perfectly clear: there is no warrant for Compromise but in
Success. Use a worm if you will, but you must have fish to show for it,
if you would escape the finger of scorn. If you find yourself camping
by an unknown brook, and are deputed to catch the necessary trout for
breakfast, it is wiser to choose the surest bait. The crackle of the
fish in the frying-pan will atone for any theoretical defect in your
method. But to choose the surest bait, and then to bring back no fish,
is unforgivable. Forsake Plato if you must,--but you may do so only at
the price of justifying yourself in the terms of Aristotelian
arithmetic. The college president who abandoned his college in order to
run a cotton mill was free to make his own choice of a calling; but he
was never pardoned for bankrupting the mill. If one is bound to be a
low man rather than an impractical idealist, he should at least make
sure of his vulgar success.

Is all this but a disguised defense of pot-hunting? No. There is no
possible defense of pot-hunting, whether it be upon a trout brook or in
the stock market. Against fish or men, one should play the game fairly.
Yet for that matter some of the most skillful fly-fishermen I have
known were pot-hunters at heart, and some of the most prosaic-looking
merchants were idealists compared to whom Shelley was but a dreaming
boy. All depends upon the spirit with which one makes his venture. I
recall a boy of five who gravely watched his father tramp off after
rabbits,--gun on shoulder and beagle in leash. Thereupon he shouldered
a wooden sword, and dragging his reluctant black kitten by a string,
sallied forth upon the dusty Vermont road "to get a lion for
breakfast." That is the true sporting temper! Let there be but a fine
idealism in the quest, and the particular object is unessential. "A
true fisherman's happiness," says Mr. Cleveland, "is not dependent upon
his luck." It depends upon his heart.

No doubt all amateur fishing is but "play,"--as the psychologists
soberly term it: not a necessary, but a freely assumed activity, born
of surplusage of vitality. Nobody, not even a carpenter wearied of his
job, has to go fishing unless he wants to. He may indeed find himself
breakfast-less in camp, and obliged to betake himself to the
brook,--but then he need not have gone into the woods at all. Yet if
he does decide to fish, let him

  "Venture as warily, use the same skill,
   Do his best, ..."

whatever variety of tackle he may choose. He can be a whole-souled
sportsman with the poorest equipment, or a mean "trout-hog" with the
most elaborate.

Only, in the name of gentle Izaak himself, let him be a _complete_
angler; and let the man be a passionate amateur of all the arts of
life, despising none of them, and using all of them for his soul's good
and for the joy of his fellows. If he be, so to speak, but a
worm-fisherman,--a follower of humble occupations, and pledged to
unromantic duties,--let him still thrill with the pleasures of the true
sportsman. To make the most of dull hours, to make the best of dull
people, to like a poor jest better than none, to wear the threadbare
coat like a gentleman, to be outvoted with a smile, to hitch your wagon
to the old horse if no star is handy,--this is the wholesome philosophy
taught by fishing with a worm. The fun of it depends upon the heart.
There may be as much zest in saving as in spending, in working for
small wages as for great, in avoiding the snapshots of publicity as in
being invariably first "among those present." But a man should be
honest. If he catches most of his fish with a worm, secures the larger
portion of his success by commonplace industry, let him glory in it,
for this, too, is part of the great game. Yet he ought not in that case
to pose as a fly-fisherman only,--to carry himself as one aware of the
immortalizing camera,--to pretend that life is easy, if one but knows
how to drop a fly into the right ripple. For life is not easy, after
all is said. It is a long brook to fish, and it needs a stout heart and
a wise patience. All the flies there are in the book, and all the bait
that can be carried in the box, are likely to be needed ere the day is
over. But, like the Psalmist's "river of God," this brook is "full of
water," and there is plenty of good fishing to be had in it if one is
neither afraid nor ashamed of fishing sometimes with a worm.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FISHING WITH A WORM***


******* This file should be named 16369.txt or 16369.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/6/3/6/16369



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

