The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Highland Fling and How to Teach it.
by Horatio N. Grant

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Highland Fling and How to Teach it.

Author: Horatio N. Grant

Release Date: July 19, 2004 [EBook #12942]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HIGHLAND FLING ***




Produced by Susan Skinner.




THE HIGHLAND FLING

--AND--

HOW TO TEACH IT.

--BY--

PROF. GRANT,

485 Main St., Buffalo, N.Y.


November, 1892.  Book No. 2.

ELECTRIC CITY PRESS, BUFFALO, N.Y.




THE HIGHLAND FLING
AND HOW TO TEACH IT.


In teaching fancy dances, more rapid progress will be made by forming
exercises characteristic of the movements to be executed.

This dance comprises a hopping movement and the laws of opposition must
be observed with the hands and arms, therefore I will give a few
exercises which must be thoroughly practised.

In describing, the letter R denotes right foot, L, the left.


EXERCISE NO. I

Hop four times on L. (one bar, four counts.)

Hop four times on R. (one bar, four counts.)

Hop four times on L. (one bar, four counts.)

Hop four times on R, turning completely around towards the right hand.
(one bar, four counts.)

Repeat the whole movement by hopping first on R, then on L, then on R,
then on L, turning towards the left hand.

This exercise lays the foundation for the fling.


Exercise No. 2.

Stand on L, extend R to second position, (count one.)

Bring the R up back of L, (count two.)

Extend R to second position, (count three.)

Bring R up in front of L, (count four, one bar.)

Go through the same positions with L, to the same number of counts, (one
bar.)

Repeat again with R, (count four, one bar.)

Hop four times on R, turning towards the right hand, (count four, one
bar.)

This makes four bars.

Repeat the entire movements with L, which will bring the turn the last
time on L, towards the left hand, completing the eight bars.

Note--In placing the R or L in second position, do not extend it too far
out, let the toe only touch the floor, the heel well raised. The toe
should be pointed towards the floor as much as possible in all
movements.


Exercise No. 3.

This exercise I introduce for the changing of weight from one foot to
the other.

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, extend R to second position,
(count one.)

Hop again on L, and at the same time and count, bring R up in front of
L, (count two, R is now up.)

Hop on to R and at the same time, and count, extend L to second position
(count one.)

Hop again on R, and bring L up in front, toe pointed, (count two.)
Repeat changing from one foot to the other, until an easy movement has
been acquired.


Exercise No. 4.

Hand Movements--Place right hand on the hip, the fingers towards the
back, raise the left well up with the fingers towards the head which
makes a rounding position of the arm, or describing a half circle from
the shoulder to the fingers, the head should be inclined a little to the
left.

Hold this position, (count four, one bar.)

Reverse it, right up, left on hip, (count four, one bar.)

Repeat the left, (count four, one bar.)

Reverse it, right up, left on hip, (count four, one bar.) while the turn
is being made.

Keep this position, right up, left on hip, (count four, one bar.)

Note--The movements of the feet will be changed from R to L.

Reverse it, left up, right on hip, (count four, one bar.)

Repeat, right up, left on hip, (count four, one bar.)

Reverse it, left up, right on hip, (count four, one bar.) 8 bars will
complete the hand movements, leaving them in position for the next step.

As the effect of the dance depends largely upon the artistic movements
of the hands, this exercise should be well studied.

Abbreviation Left hand up, while the R foot is moving and the L hopping.

Right hand up while the L foot is moving and the R hopping.

Left hand up, while the R foot is moving and the L hopping.

Right hand up, while turning with hopping step on R foot.

Keep the right hand up after turning for the beginning of the next step.




HIGHLAND FLING.


Step One.

Part First, One Bar.

Position--Left hand up, right on hip. Hop on L and at the same time and
count, extend R toe to second position, heel raised, (count one.)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, bring R up back of L, toe
pointing down, (count two.)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, extend R to second position,
heel raised, (count three.)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, bring the R up in front of L,
toe pointing down, (count four.)


Part Second, One Bar.

Change the position of the hands, and at the same time and count, hop on
to R, (which is up in front.) extending L toe to second position, heel
raised, (count one.)

NOTE--The change of hand positions, hopping on to R, extending L to
second position, must be done to one count.

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring L up back of R, toe
pointed down, (count two.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, extend L to second position,
(count three.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring L up in front of R, toe
pointed down, (count four.)


Part Third, One Bar.

Change the position of the hands, and at the same time and count, hop on
to L and extend R toe to second position, (count one)

Hop on L again and bring R up back of L, (count two.)

Hop on L again, and extend R toe to second position (count three)

Hop on L again, and bring R up in front, (count four.)


Part Fourth, One Bar, Turning.

The R foot is now up in front.

The position of the hands should be changed the Right up etc.

Hop on to R, and at the same time and count, bring the L up back of R,
(count one)

Hop again on R, and at the same time and count bring the L around in
front, (count two.)

Hop again on R, and at the same time and count, bring the L around back,
(count three.)

Hop again on R, and at the same time and count, bring the L around in
front (count four.) The four parts require four bars.

Note--A complete turn should be made during the four counts given,
turning one fourth on each hop of the R foot.

Turn towards the right hand when turning on the right foot.

In bringing the L around from front to back, or back to front, it should
be carried as closely as possible to the calf of the R leg, the toe
always well pointed down.


Part Fifth.

The position of the hands should be kept the same as in part fourth, the
right up.

The entire four parts are now repeated, beginning with the L foot, as
described below, somewhat abbreviated.

Hop on R, extend L to 2nd position, (count one.)

Hop on R, bring L up back, (count two.)

Hop on R, extend L to 2nd position, (count three.)

Hop on R, bring L up in front, (count four.)


Part Sixth.

Hand positions changed, left up.

Hop on L, extend R to 2nd position, (count one.)

Hop on L, bring R up back, (count two.)

Hop on L, extend R to 2nd position, (count three.)

Hop on L, bring R up in front, (count four.)


Part Seventh.

Hand positions changed, right up.

Hop on R, extend L to 2nd position,(count one)

Hop on R, bring L up back, (count two.)

Hop on R, extend L to 2nd position (count three.)

Hop on R, bring L up in front, (count four.)


Part Eight Turning.

Hand positions changed, left up

Hop on L, bring R up back, (count one.)

Hop on L, bring R around in front, (count two.)

Hop on L, bring R around back, (count three.)

Hop on L, bring R around in front, (count four.)

Turning one fourth on each hop, towards the left hand. This completes
one step, 8 bars, fully described for both feet.


Step Two.

Part First.

At the finish of step one, the left hand will be found up in position to
begin step two.

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, extend R to second position,
(count one)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, bring the R up back, (count
two.)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, bring the R around in front,
(count three.)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, bring the R in front, (count
four.)


Part Second.

Hand positions changed, right up.

Hop on to R, and at the same time and count, extend L to 2nd position,
(count one.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring L up back, (count two.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, carry L around in front,
(count three.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, carry L around back, (count
four)


Part Third.

Hand positions changed, left up.

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, extend R to second position,
(count one.)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, bring R up back, (count two.)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, bring R around in front,
(count three.)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, bring the R around back,
(count four.)


Part Fourth. Turning.

Hand positions changed, right up.

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring the L up back, (count
one.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring the L around in front,
(count two.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring the L around back,
(count three.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring the L around in front,
(count four.)

Turn one-fourth on each hop towards the right hand.

Caution--Be sure to carry the heel close to the calf of the leg as the
foot is being brought around, also, the toe pointed well down.


Part Fifth.

The hands will be found in the correct position at the finish of part
fourth, for part fifth, right up etc, part fifth, sixth, seventh and
eight are the same as first, second, third and fourth, only reversed.

Hop on R, L to 2nd position, (count one)

Hop on R, L up back, (count two)

Hop on R, L around in front (count three)

Hop on R, L around back (count four)


Part Sixth.

Hand positions changed, left up.

Hop on L, R to 2nd position (count one)

Hop on L, R up back, (count two)

Hop on L, R around front, (count three)

Hop on L, R around back (count four)


Part Seventh.

Hand positions changed, right up.

Hop on R, L to 2nd position (count one)

Hop on R, L up back, (count two)

Hop on R, L around front, (count three)

Hop on R, L around back, (count four)


Part Eight. Turning.

Hand position changed, left up.

Hop on L, R up back, (count one)

Hop on L, R around front, (count two)

Hop on L, R around back, (count three)

Hop on L, R around front, (count four)

Turning one fourth on each count towards the left hand, each part, one
bar, full step, eight bars. At the finish of this part the hands will be
found in position for the next.


Step Three

Part First

Left hand up etc.

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, extend R to second position,
(count one)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, bring the R up back, (count
two)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, bring the heel of R, (toe well
raised) in fifth position front (count three)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, change the position of the R,
the toe to the toe of L, the heel well raised (heel and toe movement)
(count four.)


Part Second.

Hand positions changed, right up.

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, extend L to second position,
(count one)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring the L up back, (count
two.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring the heel of L, (toe well
raised) to fifth position front (count three.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, change the position of the L,
from heel to toe, the heel well raised, (count four.)


Part Third.

Hand positions changed, left up.

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, extend R to second position,
(count one.)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, bring R up back, (count two.)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, bring the heel of R (toe well
raised) to fifth position front, (count three.)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, change the position of the R
from heel to toe, the heel well raised, (count four)


Part Fourth. Turning.

Hand positions changed, right up.

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring the L up back, (count
one.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring the L around front,
(count two)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring the L around back,
(count three.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring the L around in front,
(count four.)

Turn one-fourth on each hop towards the right hand.

Note--The following four parts are the same as the preceeding, only the
movements are reversed. The hands are now in position for part fifth,
the right up, etc.


Part Fifth.

Right hand up.

Hop on R, L to 2nd position, (count one.)

Hop on R, L up back, (count two.)

Hop on R, L heel 5th position front, (count three)

Hop on R, L toe 5th position front, (count four.)


Part Sixth.

Hand positions changed, left up.

Hop on L, R to 2nd position, (count one.)

Hop on L, R up back, (count two)

Hop on L, R heel 5th position front, (count three)

Hop on L, R toe 5th position front, (count four)


Part Seventh.

Hand positions changed, right up.

Hop on R, L to 2nd position, (count one)

Hop on R, L up back, (count two)

Hop on R, L heel 5th position front, (count three)

Hop on R, L toe 5th position front, (count four.)


Part Eight. Turning.

Hand positions changed, left up.

Hop on L, R up back, (count one)

Hop on L, R around in front, (count two.)

Hop on L, R around back, (count three.)

Hop on L, R around in front, (count four.)

Turning one-fourth towards the left hand on each count.

The hands are in position for the beginning of the next step, left up.


NOTICE.

As I have a little space here owing to a slight error. I will call
attention to the music for the Highland Fling. Properly accented music
for the dance is of the utmost importance, and I am prepared to furnish
the same in manuscript to my patrons for one dollar orchestra parts.
There is no printed copy of the music I use to my knowledge. Will
furnish first violin part for twenty-five cents.

Address all communications to

PROF. GRANT,
485 Main Street, Buffalo, N.Y.


Step Four.

Part First.

Hand positions, left up.

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, extend the R to second
position, (count one.)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, bring R up in front, toe
pointed down, (count two.)

Hop on L, and keep the R where it is (count three)

Hop on L, and keep the R where it is (count four.)

Note.--As the R is keep in front there will be a downward movement at
each hop.


Part Second.

Hand positions changed, right up.

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, extend L to second position,
(count one.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring L, up in front, (count
two.)

Hop on R, and keep the L where it is (count three)

Hop on R, and keep the L where it is (count four.)


Part Third.

Hand positions changed, left up.

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, extend the R, to second
position (count one.)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, bring the R up in front,
(count two.)

Hop on L, and keep the R where it is, (count three.)

Hop on L, and keep the R where it is, (count four)


Part Fourth, Turning.

Hand positions changed, right up.

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring L up back, (count one.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring the L around in front,
(count two.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring the L around back,
(count three.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring the L around front,
(count four.)

Turn one-fourth towards the right hand on each hop. Hands are in
position to begin part fifth.


Part Fifth.

Hand positions, right up.

The following four parts are the same as the preceding, only reversed.

Hop on R, L to 2nd position, (count one.)

Hop on R, L up in front, (count two.)

Hop on R, L still in front, (count three.)

Hop on R, L still in front, (count four.)


Part Sixth.

Hands position changed, left up.

Hop on L, R to 2nd position, (count one.)

Hop on L, R up in front, (count two.)

Hop on L, R still in front, (count three.)

Hop on L, R still in front, (count four.)


Part Seventh.

Hand positions changed, right up.

Hop on R, L to 2nd position, (count one.)

Hop on R, L up in front, (count two.)

Hop on R, L still in front, (count three.)

Hop on R, L still in front, (count four.)


Part Eight. Turning.

Hands positions changed, left up.

Hop on L, R up back, (count one.)

Hop on L, R around in front, (count two.)

Hop on L, R around back, (count three.)

Hop on L, R around in front, (count four.)

Turning one-fourth on each hop towards the left hand. Hands are in
position for the next step.


Step Five.

Part First

Hands positions, left up.

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, extend R to second position,
(count one.)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, bring R up back, (count two.)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, extend R to second position,
(count three.)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, bring R up in front, (count
four.)


Part Second.

Hand positions changed, right up.

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, extend L to second position,
(count one.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring L up back, (count two.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, extend L to second position,
(count three.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring L up in front, (count
four.)


Part Third.

Hand positions changed. Both hands for this part are placed upon the
hips.

Hop on to both feet about six inches apart, (count one.)

Hop from both feet and cross them, weight on both, the left ahead,
(count two)

Hop again front both feet and separate them about six inches, (count
three.)

Hop again and cross them, this time the right in front, (count four.)


Part Fourth. Turning.

Hand positions changed. The right up, the left remaining upon the hip.

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring the L up back, (count
one.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring the L around in front,
(count two.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring the L around back,
(count three)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring the L around in front,
(count four.)

Turning one-fourth on each hop, towards the right hand. The hands are
now in position for part five.


Part Fifth.

Hand positions the same as part fourth, right up. We now have a
repetition of the first four parts, beginning with the left foot.

Hop on R, L to second position, (count one.)

Hop on R, L up back, (count two.)

Hop on R, L to second position, (count three.)

Hop on R, L up in front, (count four.)


Part Sixth.

Hand positions changed, left up.

Hop on L, R to 2nd position, (count one.)

Hop on L, R up back, (count two.)

Hop on L, R to 2nd position, (count three.)

Hop on L, R up front, (count four.)


Part Seventh.

Hand positions changed, both hands on hips.

Hop on to both feet separated, (count one.)

Hop on to both feet crossed, the R in front, (count two.)

Hop on to both feet separated, (count three.)

Hop on to both feet crossed, the L in front, (count four.)


Part Eighth. Turning.

Hand positions changed, the left up, the right remaining upon the hip.

Hop on L, bring R up back, (count one.)

Hop on L, bring R around in front, (count two.)

Hop on L, bring R around back, (count three.)

Hop on L, bring R around in front, (count four.)

Turning one-fourth on each hop towards the left hand.

Note--So far, the work has been divided into parts of one bar each,
eight parts finishing the step, making eight bars.


Step Six.

A double step combining one and two.

Part First.

Hand positions, left up.

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, extend R to second position,
(count one.)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, bring R up back, (count two)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, bring R around in front,
(count three.)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, bring R around back, (count
four.)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, extend R to second position,
(count five)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, bring R up back, (count six.)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, extend R to second position,
(count seven.)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, bring R up in front, (count
eight, two bars.)


Part Second.

Hand positions changed, right up, etc.

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, extend L to second position,
(count one.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring L up back, (count two.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring L around in front,
(count three.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring the L around back,
(count four.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, extend the L to second
position, (count five)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring the L up back, (count
six).

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, extend L to second position,
(count seven).

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring L up in front, (count
eight) (two bars).

Part Third.

The same as part first.

Hand positions changed, left up.

Hop on L, extend R to second position, (count one)

Hop on L, bring R up back, (count two).

Hop on L, bring R around in front (count three).

Hop on L, bring R around back, (count four).

Hop on L, extend R to 2nd position, (count five.)

Hop on L, bring R up back, (count six.)

Hop on L, extend R to 2nd position, (count seven)

Hop on L, bring R up in front, (count eight) two bars.


Part Fourth.

Hand positions changed, right up.

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, extend L to second position,
(count one.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring L up back, (count two.)

Hand positions changed, left up.

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, extend R to second position,
(count three).

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, bring R up back, (count four)
one bar.


Part Fifth. Turning.

Hands positions changed, right up.

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring L up back, (count one.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring L around in front,
(count two.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring L around back, (count
three.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring L around in front,
(count four, one bar)

Turn one-fourth at each hop towards the right hand. The following will
be a repetition of the preceeding movements, beginning with L foot.


Part Sixth.

Hand positions changed, right up.

Hop on R, L to 2nd position, (count one.)

Hop on R, L up back, (count two.)

Hop on R, L around in front, (count three.)

Hop on R, L around back, (count four.)

Hop on R, L to 2nd position, (count five)

Hop on R, L up back, (count six.)

Hop on R, L to 2nd position, (count seven.)

Hop on R, L up in front, (count eight, two bars.)


Part Seventh.

Hand positions changed, left up.

Hop on L, R to 2nd position, (count one.)

Hop on L, R up back, (count two.)

Hop on L, R around in front, (count three.)

Hop on L, R around back, (count four.)

Hop on L, R to 2nd position (count five.)

Hop on L, R up back, (count six.)

Hop on L, R to 2nd position, (count seven.)

Hop on L, R up in front, (count eight, two bars.)


Part Eighth.

Hand positions changed, right up.

Hop on R, L to 2nd position, (count one.)

Hop on R, L up back, (count two.)

Hop on R, L around front, (count three.)

Hop on R, L around back, (count four.)

Hop on R, L to 2nd position, (count five.)

Hop on R, L up back, (count six.)

Hop on R, L to 2nd position, (count seven.)

Hop on R, L up in front, (count eight, two bars.)


Part Ninth.

Hand positions changed, left up.

Hop on L, R to 2nd position, (count one.)

Hop on L, R up back, (count two.)

Hand positions changed, right up.

Hop on R, L to 2nd position, (count three.)

Hop on R, L up back, (count four, one bar.)


Part Tenth. Turning.

Hand positions changed, left up.

Hop on L, bring R up back, (count one.)

Hop on L, bring R around in front, (count two.)

Hop on L, bring R around back, (count three.)

Hop on L, bring R around in front, (count four.)

Turn one-fourth on each hop towards the left hand, one bar. The step
completed, sixteen bars.


Step Seven

Part First.

Hand positions the same as the finish of step six, left up.

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, extend R to second position,
(count one.)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, bring R up back, (count two.)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, extend R to second position,
(count three.)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, bring R up in front, (count
four.)


Part Second.

Hand positions changed, both on hips. Run forward, the first step with R
which is up, (count one.)

The second step with L, crossing it over the R, (count two.)

The third with R, crossing it over the L, (count three.)

One hop on R, as you are, the L kept back and up, (count four.)

Note--This is a running step forward, crossing the feet and hop on the
foot you step with last, which leaves the L up for a backward run, don't
walk it.


Part Third.

Hand positions the same, on hips.

Run backward, the first step with L, which is already back, (count one.)

The second step with R, bringing it around back of L, which makes a
cross of the feet, (count two.)

The third step with L, bringing it around back of R, (count three.)

Hop on L, the same foot you stepped with last, (count four.)

Note--It is more difficult to run backward, crossing the feet than
forward, for a small child it may be made a strait forward and backward
run, three steps and a hop backward.

Part Fourth. Turning.

Hand positions changed, right up, left on hip, part third was finished
on L.

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring L up back, (count one.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring L around in front,
(count two.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring L around back, (count
three.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring L around in front,
(count four.)

Turn one-fourth on each hop towards the right hand.

The hands are in position for the next part, which is the beginning of a
repetition of the preceding four parts only reversed.


Part Fifth.

Hands positions, right up, etc.

Hop on R, L to 2nd position, (count one.)

Hop on R, L up back, (count two.)

Hop on R, L to 2nd position, (count three.)

Hop on R, L up front, (count four.)


Part Sixth.

Hand positions changed, both on hips.

Run forward, L first, (count one.)

Run forward, R next, (count two.)

Run forward, L next, (count three.)

Hop on L, as you are, R up back, (count four.)


Part Seventh.

Run backward, R first, (count one.)

Run backward, L next, (count two.)

Run backward, R next, (count three.)

Hop on R, as you are, L up back, (count four.)


Part Eighth. Turning.

Hand positions changed, left up, right on hip.

Hop on L, R up back, (count one.)

Hop on L, R in front, (count two.)

Hop on L, R in back, (count three.)

Hop on L, R in front, (count four.)

Turn one-fourth on each hop towards the left hand, eight bars. The hands
are in position for the beginning of the following step.


Step Eight

Part First.

Hand positions, left up, etc.

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, extend R to second position,
(count one.)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, bring R up back, (count two.)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, extend R to second
position, (count three)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, bring R up in front, (count
four.)

Hop a little forward on to R, and at the same time and count, bring the
L up back (count five).

Hop again on R, and keep the L where it is (count six).

Hop back on to L, and at the same time and count, keep the R in front,
toe pointed down, (count seven.)

Hop again on L, and keep the R, where it is (count eight, two bars.)


Part Second.

Hand positions changed, right up.

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, extend L to second position,
(count one.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring L up back, (count two)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, extend L to second position,
(count three)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring L up in front, (count
four.)

Hop a little forward on to L, and at the same time and count, bring the
R up back, (count five)

Hop again on L, and keep the R where it is, (count six)

Hop back on to R, and at the same time and count, bring L up in front,
toe pointed down, (count seven.)

Hop again on R, and keep the L where it is, (count eight, two bars.)


Part Third.

Hand positions changed, left up.

A repetition of part first.

Hop on L, R to 2nd position, (count one.)

Hop on L, R up back, (count two)

Hop on L, R to 2nd position, (count three.)

Hop on L, R up in front, (count four.)

Hop forward on to R, L up back, (count five)

Hop again on R, same position, L still back, (count six.)

Hop back on to L, R up in front, (count seven)

Hop again on L, same position, R kept in front, (count eight, two bars.)


Part Fourth.

Hand positions changed, right up.

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, extend L to 2nd position,
(count one.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring the L up back, (count
two.)

Hand positions changed, left up.

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, extend the R to second
position (count three.)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, bring the R up back, (count
four.) one bar.


Part Fifth. Turning.

Hand positions changed, right up.

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring the L up back, (count
one.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring the R around in front
(count two.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring the L around back.(count
three.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring the L around in front,
(count four.) one bar.

Turning one-fourth on each hop, towards the right hand. The positions of
the hands, unchanged for the next part.

The following five parts will be a repetition of the preceding, only
reversed.


Part Six.

Hand position, right up.

Hop on R, L to 2nd position, (count one)

Hod on R, L up back, (count two).

Hop on R, L to 2nd position, (count three).

Hop on R, L up in front, (count four.)

Hop forward on to L, R up back, (count five)

Hop again on L, R as it is, (count six.)

Hop back on to R, L up in front, (count seven.)

Hop again on R, L as it is, (count eight, two bars.)


Part Seventh.

Hand positions changed, left up.

Hop on L, R to 2nd position, (count one.)

Hop on L, R up back, (count two.)

Hop on L, R to 2nd position, (count three.)

Hop on L, R in front, (count four.)

Hop forward on R, L up back, (count five.)

Hop again on R, L as it is, (count six.)

Hop back on to L, R up in front, (count seven)

Hop again on L, R as it is, (count eight, two bars)


Part Eighth.

Hand positions changed, right up.

Hop on R, L to 2nd position, (count one.)

Hop on R, L up back, (count two.)

Hop on R, L to 2nd position, (count three.)

Hop on R, L up in front, (count four.)

Hop forward on L, R up back, (count five.)

Hop again on L, R as it is, (count six.)

Hop back on to R, L up in front, (count seven.)

Hop again on R, L as it is, (count eight, two bars.)


Part Ninth.

Hand positions changed, left up.

Hop on L, R to 2nd position, (count one.)

Hop on L, R up back, (count two.)

Hand positions changed, right up.

Hop on R, L to 2nd position, (count three.)

Hop on R, L up back, (count four, one bar.)


Part Tenth. Turning.

Hand positions changed, left up.

Hop on L, R up back, (count one.)

Hop on L, R around in front, (count two.)

Hop on L, R around back, (count three.)

Hop on L, R around in front, (count four.)

Turning one-fourth on each hop towards the left hand, one bar. The step
completed, sixteen bars.


Step Nine

Part First.

Hand positions the same as the finish of step eight, left up.

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, extend R to second position,
(count one.)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, bring R up in front, (count
two.)

Hands positions changed to hips.

Run forward, stepping first with R, (count three.)

Run forward stepping with L, (count four, one bar)


Part Second.

Hand positions changed, left up.

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, extend R to 2nd position,
(count one.)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, bring R in front, (count two.)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, extend R to 2nd position,
(count three.)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, bring R up back, (count four,
one bar.)


Part Third.

Hand positions changed to the hips.

Run backward, R first, (count one.)

The L next, (count two.)

The R next, (count three.)

The L next, (count four.)

Note--In running backward, cross the feet as much as possible, letting
one foot nearly take the place of the other, one bar.


Part Fourth. Turning.

Hand positions changed, right up.

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring the L up back, (count
one.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring the L around in front,
(count two).

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring the L around back,
(count three.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring the L up in front,
(count four)

Turn one-fourth on each hop towards the right hand. The following four
parts will be the same as the preceeding, only reversed. The hands are
in position for the following part.


Part Fifth.

Hand positions, right up.

Hop on R, L to second position, (count one.)

Hop on R, L up in front, (count two.)

Hands on hips.

Run with L, (count three).

Run with R, (count four).


Part Sixth.

Hand positions changed, right up.

Hop on R, L to 2nd position, (count one.)

Hop on R, L up in front, (count two.)

Hop on R, L to 2nd position, (count three.)

Hop on R, L up back, (count four.)


Part Seventh.

Hands on hips.

Run backward, L first, (count one.)

Run backward, R next, (count two.)

Run backward, L next, (count three.)

Run backward, R next, (count four)


Part Eighth. Turning.

Hand positions changed, left up.

Hop on L, R up back, (count one.)

Hop on L, R around in front, (count two).

Hop on L, R around back,(count three.)

Hop on L, R around in front, (count four.)

Turning one-fourth on each hop towards the left hand, eight bars.

Note--In this step there are quick changes of the hands to be made, and
the crossing of the feet must be observed, forward or backward, to
obtain the right effect. The forward run is only two steps, the backward
four.


Step Ten.

Part First.

Hand positions, the same as at the finish of step nine, left up.

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, extend R to 2nd
position, (count one)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, bring R up back, (count two.)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, extend R to second position,
(count three).

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, bring R up in front, (count
four.)

Hop forward on to R, and at the same time and count, raise L in back,
(count five).

Hop back on to L, and at the same time and count, bring R, up in front
dashing it towards the floor, (count six.)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, dash R towards the floor,
(count seven)

Hop on L, dash R again, (count eight) two bars.


Part Second.

Hand positions changed, right up. The following part is the same as the
first, only reversed.

Hop on R, L to 2nd position, (count one.)

Hop on R, L up back, (count two)

Hop on R, L to 2nd position, (count three).

Hop on R, L up in front, (count four.)

Hop on to L, R up back (count five.)

Hop back on to R, L in front with dash, (count six.)

Hop on R, dash L, (count seven.)

Hop on R, dash L, (count eight) two bars.


Part Third.

Hand positions changed, left up. Counterpart of part first.

Hop on L, R to 2nd position, (count one.)

Hop on L, R up back, (count two.)

Hop on L, R to 2nd position, (count three.)

Hop on L, R up in front, (count four)

Hop forward on to R, L up back, (count five.)

Hop back on to L, R in front with dash, (count six.)

Hop on L, dash R, (count seven.)

Hop on L, dash R, (count eight.) two bars.


Part Fourth.

Hand positions changed, right up.

Hop on R, L to 2nd position, (count one)

Hop on R, L up back, (count two.)

Hand positions changed left up.

Hop on L, R to 2nd position, (count three).

Hop on L, R up back, (count four. One bar.)


Part Fifth. Turning.

Hand positions changed, right up.

Hop on to R, L up back, (count one).

Hop on R, L around in front, (count two).

Hop on R, L around back, (count three).

Hop on R, L around in front, (count four.)

Turn one-fourth on each hop towards the right hand. Hands are in
position for the next part. The following parts are the same as the
preceding only reversed.


Part Sixth.

Hand positions, right up.

Hop on R, L to 2nd position, (count one).

Hop on R, L up back, (count two).

Hop on R, L to 2nd position, (count three.)

Hop on R, L up in front, (count four.)

Hop on to L, R up back, (count five.)

Hop back on to R, L in front with dash (count six)

Hop on R, dash L (count seven.)

Hop on R, dash L, (count eight.)


Part Seventh.

Hand positions, left up.

Hop on L, R to 2nd position, (count one.)

Hop on L, R up back, (count two.)

Hop on L, R to 2nd position, (count three).

Hop on L, R up front, (count four.)

Hop on to R, L up back, (count five.)

Hop back onto L, R in front with a dash, (count six).

Hop on L, dash R, (count seven.)

Hop on L, dash R, (count eight.)


Part Eighth.

Hand positions changed, right up.

Hop on to R, L to 2nd position, (count one.)

Hop on R, L up back, (count two.)

Hop on R, L to 2nd position, (count three.)

Hop on R, L up front, (count four.)

Hop on to L, forward R up back, (count five.)

Hop back on to R, L up in front with a dash, (count six.)

Hop on R, dash L, (count seven.)

Hop on R, dash L, (count eight.)


Part Ninth.

Hand positions changed, left up.

Hop on to L, R to 2nd position, (count one.)

Hop on L, R up back, (count two.)

Hand positions changed, right up.

Hop on R, L to 2nd position, (count three.)

Hop on R, L up back, (count four.)


Part Tenth. Turning.

Hand positions changed, left up.

Hop on to L, R up back, (count one.)

Hop on L, R around in front, (count two.)

Hop on L, R around back, (count three.)

Hop on L, R around front, (count four.)

Turning one-fourth on each count, towards the left hand.


Step Eleven

Part First.

Hand positions the same as at the finish of step ten, left up.

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, place the toe of R to the
hollow of L foot, (count one.)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, place the heel of R in fifth
position front, heel well raised, (count two.)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, place the toe of R where the
heel was, (count three.)

Hop on L, and at the same time and count, place the heel of R in fifth
position again, (count four.)


Part Second.

Hand positions changed, right up.

Hop on to R, and at the same time and count, place the toe of L, to the
hollow of R foot, (count one.)

Hop on R, and the same time and count, place the heel of L in fifth
position front, toe well raised, (count two.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, place the toe of L where the
heel was, (count three.)

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, place the heel of L in 5th
position again, toe raised, (count four.)


Part Third.

Hand positions changed, left up. This is a counterpart of part first.

Hop on L, R toe to hollow of L foot, (count one.)

Hop on L, R heel in 5th position front, (count two)

Hop on L, R toe where heel was, (count three.)

Hop on L, R heel in 5th position front, (count four)


Part Fourth. Turning.

Hand positions changed, right up.

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring L up back, (count one.)

Hop on R, bring L around in front, (count two.)

Hop on R, bring L around back, (count three.)

Hop on R, bring L around front (count four.)

Turn one-fourth on each hop, towards the right hand. The hands are in
position for the following part.

Note--When the toe if place to the hollow of the foot, turn the heel well
out.

Part Fifth.

Hand positions, right up.

The following parts are a repetition of the preceding, only reversed.

Hop on R, L toe to the hollow of R, (count one.)

Hop on R, L heel to 5th position front, (count two)

Hop tn R, L toe where heel was, (count three.)

Hop on R, L heel to 5th position front, (count four)


Part Sixth

Hand positions changed, left up.

Hop on L, R toe to the hollow of L, (count one.)

Hop on L, R heel to 5th position front, (count two)

Hop on L, R toe where heel was, (count three.)

Hop on L, R heel in 5th position front, (count four)


Part Seventh.

Hand positions changed, right up.

Hop on R, L toe to hollow of R, (count one)

Hop on R, L heel in 5th position front, (count two)

Hop on R, L toe where heel was, (count three.)

Hop on R, L heel in 5th position front, (count four)


Part Eighth. Turning.

Hand positions changed, left up.

Hop on to L, R up back, (count one.)

Hop on L, R around in front, (count two.)

Hop on L, R around in back, (count three.)

Hop on L, R around in front, (count four.)

Turning one-fourth on each hop towards the left hand, make the turn
completely around on all parts marked turning.


Final.

Hand positions changed, right up.

Hop on R, and at the same time and count, bring the L, up back, (count
one.)

Hop on R, bring L around in front (count two.)

Hop on R, bring the L around back, (count three)

Hop on R, bring the L around in front, (count four)

Turn one-fourth on each hop, towards the right hand.

Repeat the above four times, increasing the tempo of the music, (four
bars.)

Change position of the hands quickly and hop on to the L turning rapidly
towards the left, four bars.

Bow and retire.




CARD.

To the following able, and experienced teachers of dancing, who have
become subscribers in part, or whole for my work on stage and fancy
dancing. I wish to express my thanks, as it is both gratifying and
encouraging. I hope to be instrumental in imparting new ideas to all, no
matter how much knowledge they may have stored away.

Prof.  J.E. Davis,  Toronto, Canada.
  "    J.C.H. Vance,  Cleveland, Ohio.
  "    M.B. Gilbert,  Portland, Me.
  "    R.H. Taylor,  Nashua, N.H.
  "    B.L. Deming, Middletown, Conn.
  "    W.F. Favorite,  Columbus, Ohio.
  "    B.L. Clendenen, Clinton, Iowa.
  "    S.T. Horcheler,  Rochester, N.Y.
  "    Ed Foley,  Danby, Vt.
  "    D.B. Alsdorf,  Newburgh, N.Y.
  "    E. Thayer,   Des Moines, Iowa.
  "    J.A. Hawkins,   Mansfield, Ohio.
  "    C.W. Bagley, Chelsea, Mass
  "    Doring & Giegler,  New York City.
  "    W.J. Graham,   Baltimore, Md.
  "    H.A. Neidentohl,   Waynesboro, Pa.
  "    John O'Malley,  Sacramento, Cal.
  "    William Jones, Togus, Me.
Miss  C.R. Vansant,  Zanesville, Ohio.


Says Prof. Davis,

"Good luck to your new venture."


Prof. O'Malley,

"I received Step One of the Highland Fling, and concluded that if all of
your dances were explained as well, would send for some."


Prof. Clendenen,

"I have paid five to fifteen dollars to several teachers this season for
"so called" manuscript on stage dancing, and have found more
information, and clear explanation in Book One, than from any manuscript
received."




NOTE.

I shall issue some good work on artistic step dancing, which I shall
endeavor to make plain to all, and shall try my utmost to lead you on to
more difficult steps, and all I ask of my subscribers, is a little
indulgence and patience, as I am over-run with work.

Yours fraternally,

PROF. GRANT.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Highland Fling and How to Teach it.
by Horatio N. Grant

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HIGHLAND FLING ***

***** This file should be named 12942.txt or 12942.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/2/9/4/12942/

Produced by Susan Skinner.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
