The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is Going On
In It, Vol. 1, No. 56, December 2, 1897, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Great Round World and What Is Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 56, December 2, 1897
       A Weekly Magazine for Boys and Girls

Author: Various

Editor: Julia Truitt Bishop

Release Date: July 3, 2005 [EBook #16191]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD AND ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.(www.pgdp.net)








[Illustration: THE GREAT ROUND
WORLD
AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT.]

    VOL. 1   DECEMBER 2, 1897.   NO. 56

=Copyright, 1897, by THE GREAT ROUND WORLD Publishing Company.=

       *       *       *       *       *

The recent despatches from India tell us that the soldiers who are
fighting on the frontier have performed another gallant deed.

The heroes, this time, belonged to the Northamptonshire regiment.

It was necessary for the British to find out if the enemy was encamped
anywhere in the neighborhood, so a portion of the troops left the
British camp and marched to the summit of a mountain called Saran Sar.

There were no signs of the Afridis as they marched along, and the top of
the hill was reached with little difficulty.

There they found the remains of a hastily vacated camp, and from the
various signs that were around became convinced that the enemy was on
the mountain with them.

Fearing an ambush, the British commander ordered his men to retreat, and
the manoeuvre had hardly been put in effect before the tribesmen
appeared.

Following the troops closely, the Afridis fired on them from behind
every bush and rock that offered cover, and, after many of the English
soldiers had been killed or wounded, the tribesmen became so bold that
they rushed from their cover and engaged in a hand-to-hand encounter
with the soldiers.

General Westmacott, who commanded the party, at once realized that he
had serious work before him, and hastily arranging his forces so that he
could care for the wounded and move his men as quickly as possible, the
commander hastened the retreat.

It was, however, difficult to do; and in the hurry of the retreat one
little party, which had charge of a convoy of wounded comrades, became
separated from the rest of their comrades and were surrounded by the
angry tribesmen.

The retreating army reached the camp safely about dark, and then it was
discovered that a lieutenant named McIntyre and twelve soldiers were
missing.

It was at first hoped that they had simply dropped behind and would
reach camp any moment. When, however, hours passed and they did not
return, the worst fears were entertained.

At last a soldier arrived, bringing with him the dreadful news, and
telling the story of the gallant deed of the lieutenant and his brave
companions.

It seems that the rough ground over which they had to travel made the
progress of this little party very slow, and the care of the wounded
under their charge hampered their movements so much that they at last
found themselves completely cut off from their comrades.

As soon as the young officer realized what had happened to him, he
despatched one of his men for aid, and with the others formed a ring
around the wounded, preparing to defend them until help arrived.

The wounded men, on their part, behaved as nobly as the lieutenant
himself.

Realizing the situation, they begged the young officer to leave them to
their fate, and do what he could to save his own life and the lives of
his men.

Mr. McIntyre absolutely refused to abandon the wounded, and prepared to
defend them to the last.

When the messenger last saw the gallant little band, they were bravely
facing the enemy, waiting calmly for the death which was sure to follow
unless help reached them soon.

A party was immediately sent out from camp to their relief, but when the
spot was reached the brave fellows were beyond human aid.

Not a man remained alive to tell the tale of their noble struggle. The
bodies of the lieutenant and his men were found grouped about the
wounded comrades they had sacrificed their lives to save, and their
attitude in death showed that each man had died doing his duty, his face
to the foe.

       *       *       *       *       *

Some of the tribesmen have come to the conclusion that the British
soldier is a hard foe to beat.

The Orakzais have therefore sent a deputation to Gen. Sir William
Lockhart, the British commander-in-chief, asking for peace.

Sir William was willing to talk to them, but the terms he offered were
so much harder than they expected that the Orakzais do not seem
inclined to accept them.

The English general told the tribesmen that the only terms on which
England would treat with them were that they should first give back all
the rifles they had captured since the outbreak, then that they should
forfeit five hundred extra rifles and thirty thousand rupees as a fine,
and lastly, that they must offer submission to the Queen's rule within a
fortnight,--the submission to be given at a full durbar, which is a
native Indian term for a levee or reception held by a native prince or
officer of rank in British India.

As we have said, the Orakzais think these terms too severe, and are
inclined to refuse them.

The Afridis have as yet shown no signs of weakening. On the contrary,
they have sent fresh messengers to the Ameer of Afghanistan, asking his
aid. The English are confident that he will refuse, and advise them to
submit, and hope that there may soon be an end of the Indian troubles.

In the mean while the Afridis are making all the trouble they can. Every
night they cut the telegraph-wires, and every day they lay in wait for
any baggage convoy or foraging party that leaves the camp.

       *       *       *       *       *

You will be pleased to hear more about the brave piper of the Gordon
Highlanders, who, though shot through both ankles at the battle of
Dargai Ridge, propped himself up, and continued playing on his pipes to
cheer his comrades.

The Indian despatches say that he has been recommended for the Victoria
Cross.

This decoration is the English reward for great bravery. It is the
decoration of all others which British soldiers love to receive.

It is a simple little bronze cross, of the shape known as a Maltese
cross; in the centre is the crown, with the British lion standing upon
it, and on a scroll beneath the inscription "For Valor." For soldiers it
has a red ribbon, for sailors a blue. The slide through which the ribbon
passes is a bronze bar ornamented with a laurel wreath, the symbol of
victory.

The value of the Victoria Cross is practically nothing, but those men
who have been happy enough to earn it value it above any riches or
honors.

Piper Findlater, of the Gordon Highlanders, is a proud fellow just now,
and would not be willing to change places with any duke or millionaire,
no matter how great his rank or wealth, for in that little simple cross
he has gained something that rank cannot command nor money buy;
something that he possesses and the commanding officer of his regiment
may not be able to gain; something which raises him to the highest place
among men.

We felt sure you would be glad to learn that the brave piper was not
killed at Dargai Ridge, but lives to receive the reward for his gallant
conduct.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is trouble in Haiti.

Haiti is in the West Indies, and is a sister island of Cuba, and the
next largest of the Antilles. It is divided from Cuba by a strait called
the Windward Passage.

It was discovered by Columbus in 1492, and the first Spanish colony in
the New World was established on it in 1493. After a while, the colony
was neglected and died out, and Haiti became the prey of buccaneers,
those bold seafaring men, who, half pirates and half rovers, sailed the
seas during the seventeenth and early part of the eighteenth centuries,
harassing foreign foes for private gain.

After many ups and downs, the western half of Haiti was settled by
French buccaneers, and after another period this portion of the island
was ceded to France by Spain in 1693.

The French rule did not please the natives, and a long period of
discontent followed, till, in 1796, the Haitians, under the leadership
of Toussaint L'Ouverture, rebelled against the French and drove them
from the island.

The victorious insurgents then set about conquering the eastern portion
of the island, and for a time held possession of it. After a time,
however, it was divided into two portions: the western end which the
natives had secured from the French was called Haiti, and the eastern
eventually became the Republic of San Domingo.

The inhabitants of Haiti are negroes, or, to be more exact, nine-tenths
are negroes and the rest mulattoes; the whites are not very numerous,
and are principally foreign merchants and traders.

The President of Haiti is a colored man, named Tiresias Simon Sam, and
the officers of the government are all colored people.

The language of the country is a dialect known as Creole French. The
official reports of Haiti say that the President is elected for seven
years, but that his term is generally cut short by insurrections.

A good many Germans have settled in Port-au-Prince, the capital city of
Haiti, but, white people being so scarce in the island, the consuls are
kept busy trying to secure justice for their countrymen.

Last fall, the German consul to Haiti, Count Schwerin, was asked to
adjust the present difficulty.

The servant of a young German named Lueders was accused of committing
some crime, and, according to the story, a dozen stalwart Haitian
policemen went to Mr. Lueders' house and forcibly arrested him.

Mr. Lueders went to police headquarters to complain of the conduct of
the officers, and was at once arrested and charged with interfering with
the officers while doing their duty, and also with attempting to kill
them.

He was at once fined $48 and sent to jail for a month.

Mr. Lueders claimed that he was innocent and could prove it, and asked
for a second trial. When this was given him, he brought forward
witnesses who proved that he had not attempted to interfere with the
police.

In spite of this, he was again found guilty, and sentenced to one year's
imprisonment and $500 fine, presumably to punish him for demanding the
second trial.

The German consul had followed both the trials with great interest, and
when the second decision was rendered he felt that it was time for him
to interfere.

He telegraphed to Berlin for instructions, and in reply received orders
to demand the immediate release of Lueders, and to insist that damages
to the amount of $1,000 be paid by Haiti for every day Mr. Lueders had
already spent in jail--twenty in all, and an extra $5,000 for every
day's imprisonment after the request for his release was received.

At first President Simon Sam refused to listen to the demand, and Mr.
Lueders remained another six days in jail.

Then the German minister sent word to the President that he had hauled
down his flag, sent his valuable papers to the care of the United States
consul, and had broken off all relations with the Haitian government.

This announcement caused considerable excitement in Port-au-Prince. The
Germans and the natives both became indignant, and the feeling ran so
high that the angry blacks threatened to attack the German Legation and
burn it to the ground, and then lynch Lueders.

Fearing a serious outbreak which might call down the wrath of Germany,
President Simon Sam decided that the wisest thing to do was to get rid
of Lueders; so the young man was hurried from his prison and put on
board a steamer bound for New York.

By the time this was done Germany's pride had been aroused, and a
war-vessel had been ordered to sail for Port-au-Prince, and insist upon
reparation being made, under pain of bombardment of the town.

Of course, this is not a pleasant outlook for Haiti, but the natives are
not so frightened as they might be, because it is well known that
Germany has not an alarming navy, and it will probably be a good long
time before she can send a ship to Port-au-Prince, and in the mean while
other things may have occurred to make her forget the difficulty.

As a matter of fact, the only vessel available for the purpose is not
ready to go to sea, and cannot be made ready before December 10th, and
it will then be some time before she can reach Haiti.

The Germans are much annoyed that they will have to put up with the
little republic's impudence for so long a time, and one political party
in Germany is taking advantage of the opportunity to urge the necessity
of enlarging the navy.

The Emperor of Germany has for some time past been insisting that it
should be increased, and has asked that large grants of money be made
for that purpose, but the majority of the people have not been in
sympathy with him.

Germany's sea-coast is very small, and they think it a waste of money to
build and maintain an expensive navy to defend it.

The party in favor of the navy are now declaring that, if Germany wants
to keep the respect of other nations, she must maintain her dignity by
having war-vessels ready to punish offenders.

The Germans in Haiti are in full sympathy with this idea. They complain
that they are not treated with half the consideration and respect that
the American residents are, and they say that President Simon Sam
behaves better to the Americans only because he knows that he would have
a United States cruiser after him in a very few hours, if he attempted
any high-handed dealings with our citizens.

We have lately been accused by both England and Japan of being
discourteous in our diplomatic relations with other countries; it is
therefore some satisfaction to know that the Germans in Haiti greatly
appreciate the methods which our foreign ministers employ.

In the course of the discussions over the Haitian troubles it has been
said that while we are not formal in our diplomatic work, and do not
always use the polite forms which etiquette demands, our ministers have
a manly, direct way of going about their business which gains the
desired point every time.

Serious trouble is not anticipated with Haiti; it is really too small a
place to be able to oppose a great country like Germany. If she does not
speedily obey the wishes of the German government, a taste of the
war-ship's big guns will soon bring her to her senses.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nansen, the Arctic explorer, is in this country, and it will interest
you to know that he fully believes that Andree is all right, and will
return safely in due course of time.

Of all men Fridjiof Nansen is best able to form an opinion as to the
likelihood of Professor Andree ever returning to us, for he himself has
penetrated farther north than any other Arctic explorer, and has learned
so much about the Polar Sea that he is able to form a good opinion as to
the possibilities of Andree's success.

Nansen returned from his famous voyage before THE GREAT ROUND WORLD came
into existence, and so you might perhaps like to have us tell you about
him.

He is a young Norwegian, only thirty-six years old; very young to have
made such a great record.

At the age of nineteen he entered the University of Christiania and
devoted himself to the study of zooelogy, or the science of animals and
animal life, from man to the lowest form of life.

When he was twenty he made a voyage into the Northern seas for the
purpose of studying animal life in high latitudes.

When he returned he was made Curator of the Natural History Museum in
Bergen, Norway. A curator is a person in whose charge the valuable
collections in a museum are placed. He is the caretaker or custodian of
all the priceless treasures the museum contains.

Six years later Nansen made a trip across Greenland on snow-shoes.

There had long been a theory that in the interior of Greenland there
were fertile spots capable of cultivation.

Nansen proved that Greenland is covered with a huge ice-sheet, and is,
in fact, one vast glacier which rises slightly toward the interior, the
surface of the ice-cap being only occasionally interrupted by mountains
which protrude from the ice.

Nansen believed that an Arctic explorer should be able to live the same
life as the natives of the land he was exploring, and during his winter
in Greenland he lived much with the Eskimos, sleeping in their rude huts
of stone and dirt, and joining in their hunts on land and sea.

He learned many useful lessons of these people. One was how to make and
manage a kayak, or Eskimo boat, which he declares to be the handiest,
lightest, and absolutely best small boat constructed.

It was the knowledge that he gained during this Greenland winter that
enabled him to get one hundred and ninety-five miles nearer the North
Pole than any one else had ever done.

He also learned from his Arctic friends how to handle dog-teams.

The Eskimos use dogs for travelling as the Laplanders use reindeer. The
dogs are, however, much more difficult to handle, for while they are
hardy, strong, intelligent, and willing, they do not make good servants.
All their training cannot entirely tame them, and they have certain ways
and habits which lessen their usefulness.

They are, for instance, terrible fighters.

Every one who possesses a canine friend knows that this is a very
dog-like attribute, and one of which no dog, large or small, can be
entirely broken.

We all appreciate how unpleasant it is to be out walking with our
favorite French bulldog, and suddenly have our be-ribboned aristocrat
forget the dignity that his long pedigree should give him, and dash from
our side to make tufts of hair fly from somebody else's equally
be-ribboned poodle.

Such an occurrence is serious enough--but it becomes a matter of life
and death when, miles from home in a frozen country, you are depending
on your dogs to bring you safely back again, and your team forgets its
duty and becomes a waving mass of legs and tails, from which you hear
nothing but the howls of the vanquished. A dog-fight often becomes one
of the most terrible catastrophes that can overtake an explorer.

With these fierce little Eskimo dogs, the result of such an encounter
means generally the loss of two or three, and a walk home with the
wounded survivors occupying the sled.

Under the circumstances it is very necessary to understand how to handle
these useful but eccentric beasts. The Eskimos have reduced this
knowledge to a science, and from them Nansen learned to be the master of
those dogs which were of so much service to him in his last and greatest
expedition.

This expedition was undertaken in June, 1893, and its object was to
drift across the pole from Siberia to Greenland.

During Nansen's Arctic experiences he had noticed that the shores of
Greenland were strewn with driftwood of a kind also found on the shores
of Siberia.

The matter caused him some deep thought, and at length he arrived at the
conclusion that there must be a current which crosses the Arctic Ocean
and carries this material from Asia to America.

After much thought, he came to the conclusion that if he could only
build himself a vessel which would withstand the pressure of the ice,
and once get into the stream, he and his vessel would be carried with
the rest of the drift from Asia to America, and in the course of the
trip would be borne right across the North Pole.

It was a bold scheme, and for a time no one would listen to it, but
Nansen's reputation stood him in good stead here, and finally convinced
people that he must have a good foundation for his belief.

With the aid of a few wealthy persons and the assistance of the King of
Sweden, Nansen was able to have a suitable vessel built, and to make
preparations for the undertaking.

The greatest danger to Arctic travel is the pressure of the ice. When
the winter comes on, and the sea tries to freeze over, the currents and
the tides, and the unthawed blocks of ice that have been left from the
last winter, cause a terrible disturbance. The ice, in its endeavor to
pack itself solidly together, slides over itself with groans and creaks
that sound like human cries.

The force the ice exerts under these circumstances is enormous, so great
indeed that it can crush big ships, and crack their sides as though they
were no stronger than eggshells.

Nansen could not hope to build a ship which should be strong enough to
withstand this pressure, but he did hope to make one that would be able
to rise above the ice, and escape the crushing altogether.

His object was to have the sides so shaped that the ice would encounter
a rounded surface on which it could not get any hold, and would
therefore slide lower and lower down the sides of the ship until it at
last met under the keel, lifting the ship above the dangerous pressure.

The vessel, which Nansen called the _Fram_, was built according to his
own plans, and when finished was a clumsy-looking craft.

In an ordinary sea she pitched and rolled so badly that everybody on
board was seasick, and during the first few days of her trip the sailors
were one and all afraid that she would roll completely over and go to
the bottom.

In the ice she behaved exactly as Nansen had expected she would, and,
once frozen to the ice, gave the explorer no anxiety that she would be
crushed or wrecked.

For three long years Nansen and his party were away on their expedition.
Steaming from Norway to the coast of Siberia, where he took his pack of
dogs on board, Nansen headed for the Polar Sea, and made all the speed
he could to reach the farthest north possible before the winter set in,
and was finally frozen into the ice where he supposed the current must
be which was to bear him across the North Pole.

To his infinite joy, he found, after weeks of uncertainty, that he was
actually drifting with the ice, and that his theory was correct.

He did not go as directly north as he had hoped, and on March 14th,
1896, after nearly three years of patient drifting, he made up his mind
that the _Fram_ had gone as far north as she would go, and that
henceforth she would take a southerly course.

He was but three hundred and fifty miles from the Pole, and he
determined to make an effort to reach it himself, with the aid of his
dogs and kayaks.

He therefore left the _Fram_, and, with but one man to bear him company,
he made a dash for the Pole.

He succeeded in covering ninety-five miles of the unknown ocean, and
reached within two hundred and sixty-one miles of the Pole, but here he
was obliged to turn back. All his dogs were dead and he had but two
weeks' provisions left, so he turned his face south.

His surmises about the _Fram_ proved correct; she drifted south, and
eventually reached Spitzbergen.

The immediate scientific advantages of Nansen's trip are that he found
the Pole was covered by sea, and that no land existed there, as so many
persons had believed.

He found that the Polar Sea, far from being shallow, as had also been
supposed, was a wide sea of vast depth.

He explored many of the lands that lie in the Polar Sea, and made
observations that will be of immense value to geologists and botanists.

Greatest of all, he proved that it is possible for men to undertake the
perils and hardships of an Arctic expedition without loss of life or
health. The first of his achievements was the proof that there is a
current from Asia to America, in which the _Fram_ drifted for three
years, not, it is true, carrying him to Greenland, as he had expected,
but none the less taking him across the frozen sea, and landing his
vessel at Spitzbergen.

Next to it come the ease and comfort with which this tremendous
undertaking was accomplished.

During all these long years he did not lose a man, nor indeed were any
of his companions sick; the doctor of the expedition had to study
diseases of dogs to keep his hand in, so little work was there for him
to do.

The story of the voyage reads like the journal of a quiet family at
home, it is so peaceful and uneventful. It tells no tales of hardships
and privations, no sickness or suffering from the isolation.

It is instead the record of a well-ordered household, in which each man
performed the duties assigned to him, duties which gave each enough
exercise to tire him out and make him long for the quiet hours of
reading or chess-playing, or games, which were to follow in the cabin
when the day's work was done.

During the entire trip Nansen and his men performed the various duties
of their lives, turn and turn about, the difference of occupation giving
the men the change necessary to keep them in health and spirits.

The journal tells of little simple festivities, with processions round
the ship, to celebrate Christmas and birthdays. Of the extra dinners
prepared for these great occasions, dinners which made the men feel a
little tight about the waist and sleepy at the grand entertainment which
always closed a holiday.

The book is full of those little simple nothings which seem hardly worth
telling to the outside world, and which are so full of meaning to those
who have lived them through.

The diary is only here and there varied with an account of a bear-hunt,
or a dog-fight, or a wily bear coming along and stealing a dog or two
for his own private consumption. It is at times hard to realize that
these men of whom the journal treats were heroes ready to sacrifice
their lives in the interest of science, and that in this peaceful,
homelike way the greatest voyage of the century was being made.

It will interest you to know that Nansen used every available modern
invention to help make his voyage successful and bearable.

In the Arctic regions there are long months when there is no day. The
sun disappears beneath the horizon, and does not appear again for weeks.
There is no day and no sunshine, only one long night.

This time is the most trying period for Arctic travellers, and many
poor fellows have gone insane under the terrible oppression of the
months of darkness.

When this time came, and the sun had bidden its good-by to the _Fram_,
Nansen lighted his ship by means of electricity, generated from power
obtained from a windmill. When the wind failed the crew manned a
capstan, an apparatus used for hauling anchors on board ship, and which
Nansen applied to this excellent use.

With light to work by, plenty of work to do, and books and games for the
evenings, one would have thought the men were well supplied, but Nansen
added yet one more pleasure to their store. A friend had made the
expedition a present of a phonograph. Nansen had his faithful wife sing
into it all the favorite songs of the day, and so the sailors had one
more comfort for their peaceful evenings, in the singing of well-known
ballads by a well-loved voice.

       *       *       *       *       *

The five _Competitor_ prisoners have been released from Cabana fortress
after an imprisonment of nearly twenty months.

The names of these five men are: Alfredo Laborde, William Gildea, Ona
Melton, William Leavitt, Charles Barnett.

By the release of these five men Spain has given us a very decided proof
of her desire to keep our friendship.

She has not done the thing by halves either, for an order has been
issued to return the prisoners any arms that had been taken from them,
and to restore the schooner _Competitor_ to its owners.

The five prisoners will sail for New York at once, and will have the
happiness of eating their Thanksgiving dinners in their own country.

Three of the five men are native-born Americans; of the other two, one
is an Englishman, and the other a naturalized American.

Spain has, however, released them all unconditionally.

       *       *       *       *       *

General Weyler has just arrived in Spain, and the trouble we were
anticipating is about to begin.

As we told you, his ship had to put into a Cuban port for repairs before
he could really set sail for Europe, and at this port he received a
deputation of citizens, and repeated to them the speech which had made
the Spanish Ministers so angry.

He has been questioned as to the truth of the reports of this speech,
but so far has avoided giving a direct answer, and complains that the
reports are too long.

He arrived at Corunna, but it was expected that he might land at
Santander, and so his admirers in that city set to work to raise funds
for a big reception to him.

One of the features of the affair was to be a flight of rockets, six
thousand in number, which, upon exploding, should scatter ribbons
inscribed "Viva Weyler."

Subscriptions were immediately started to secure the funds necessary for
this magnificent display.

After two weeks of uninterrupted labor the committee had secured $7.80.

The persons in charge of the fete became a little embarrassed how to
spend this sum. As it had been collected from, and sent by, unknown
admirers, it could not be returned.

One practical friend suggested that one of the committee should make a
sketch of the celebrations as they had intended them to be, and spend
the $7.80 in having a nice photograph made for Weyler of the proposed
festivities.

       *       *       *       *       *

The promised reforms have not yet been granted to the Cubans, and it is
reported that General Blanco is so annoyed at the condition of affairs
that he is on the point of asking to be recalled.

He finds he has been deceived about the state of the Spanish army in
Cuba, and the dislike of the Spanish party in the island to Home Rule
has also been a sad stumbling-block in his way. These people throw every
possible obstacle in his path.

The General feels that he is in a false position, and is most unhappy
over it.

Spain is expecting him to open a brilliant fall campaign, and he is
unable to do this because he finds himself at the head of a body of
ill-paid, hungry, and disaffected soldiers, who are neither fit for
difficult work nor willing to undertake it.

On the other hand, a portion of the Cubans are expecting reforms and
help from him, and this he cannot give because he is hampered by the
ill-will of the officials and the delays of the home Government.

The peasants have been permitted to return to their homes, and
permission has been given to commence sugar-grinding. But in the
present state of the country this permission amounts to nothing. The
planters have no money to pay for grinding sugar, and unless the
Government aids them it will be impossible for them to begin operations.

The peasants have no homes to go to, and unless they are cared for until
they are able to care for themselves they must starve.

An edict was issued arranging for certain lines of cultivation that were
to be started by the peasants, in the hope of helping them. The laborers
engaged in this work were to report to the military commanders, and be
under military protection.

Nothing further has, however, been done to carry out this plan, and
indeed it seems doubtful if anything can be done. Spain has no money,
and the Spanish soldiers need food for themselves--how then can the
Spanish commanders supply the peasants with farming implements and
grain, and care for them until kindly earth yields its crop?

General Blanco seems to have unearthed some serious frauds during his
investigation. He has asked the Spanish government to send out a general
named Escribera to him, that he may make him account for the cattle
which he is supposed to have supplied for the consumption of the army,
but which never came to hand.

In the mean time the Cubans are gaining victories all over the island,
and the leaders seem more determined than ever to accept nothing but
liberty from the Spaniards.

General Gomez has notified President McKinley of this fact.

He sent him a note in which he recited the struggles and sufferings of
the Cubans, reminded him of the blood that had been spilled in the cause
of freedom, and assured him again that under no circumstances would the
patriots end the war until Spain had given up the island.

A Spanish general has been sent out by Blanco to take command of the
eastern army, and reduce the rebels to submission. He reports, however,
that the troops under him are in such a poor condition that he can
expect very little from them.

In Spain the Carlists are causing a good deal of anxiety. The Pope has
received certain information that a great rising is indeed contemplated.
Espousing the cause of the infant King Alphonso, he has sent a letter to
the Spanish clergy, desiring them to refrain from encouraging the
rebellion.

There are constant rumors of risings, and arms and ammunition have been
seized in several towns of Spain.

It seems certain that Don Carlos is only waiting for a favorable
opportunity to commence hostilities.

       *       *       *       *       *

The sheriff and deputies who shot at the strikers in the recent trouble
at Hazleton have been indicted by the Grand Jury for murder, and must
all be tried for this crime.

The Grand Jury is a body of men, generally twenty-four in number, whose
duty it is to look into complaints of crimes that have been committed,
and decide whether they are really serious enough to go to trial.

A trial by jury costs the people a great deal of money and time, and it
would not be right to allow this money to be expended unless it was
pretty sure that a crime had been committed, and that the accused person
was in some way connected with it.

A man will sometimes accuse another of a crime for spite. If it were not
for the Grand Jury the case would be brought before the judge, and it
might take weeks for the accused man to prove his innocence. In the mean
while he would have been branded by the world as a criminal.

With the Grand Jury such a state of affairs is impossible.

The Jury must first be convinced that the supposed crime has been
committed, and then that the accused person is connected with it, before
they find what is called a true bill, and allow the case to go to the
courts.

In the Hazleton case the Grand Jury has decided that a crime was
committed by the deputies in firing on strikers, and the sheriff and his
posse will have to prove that their action was justifiable, or else
suffer the penalty of their crime.

                                                     G.H. ROSENFELD.




BOOK REVIEWS.


       *       *       *       *       *

STORY OF ULYSSES.

This book consists of a series of stories of the fortunes and
misfortunes that befell Ulysses in his wanderings for ten years after
the capture of Troy. The stories are arranged in a different order from
that in the Odyssey, and form a most delightful narrative. The author,
Agnes Spafford Cook, is an excellent Greek scholar, and has been very
successful in making the deeper meanings of this great poem shine
through these stories of the trials of the wisest of Greek heroes in his
struggle against the efforts of the gods to prevent him from returning
to his native land.

The book is well illustrated and attractively bound in cloth. Price, 50
cents.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Pierre and His Poodle," by Elizabeth W. Champney, is a prettily
illustrated, bright little story of a little French boy and his master's
poodle. Pierre, in his attempts to find Popotte, the runaway poodle, has
many adventures, strange and fascinating. He finally recovers the dog,
and the story winds up with happy futures in prospect for the hero and
heroine and their friends. (Dodd, Mead & Co.)




LETTERS FROM OUR YOUNG FRIENDS.


     _Editor of "Great Round World."_

     DEAR SIR:--Being advised that THE GREAT ROUND WORLD was a
     very interesting and useful paper for use in the schoolroom,
     I have for several weeks been a subscriber for your
     magazine. It is needless to say that my pupils as well as
     myself have found the articles contained therein very
     interesting.

     In your issue of November 4th I notice that there were
     printed several letters from a school in Foxboro, Mass.

     As my pupils are interested in letter-writing, I think it
     would be a great incentive toward the accomplishment of good
     work in that direction if they may be allowed to write a
     batch of letters to the editor of THE GREAT ROUND WORLD,
     with the hope that one or two of the best of them will be
     printed in your paper. Hoping that you will give the
     letters, which I herewith enclose, your gracious attention,
     I am

                               Very truly yours,
                                      HARRIET B. RAYMOND.
     WESTPORT, CONN., November 11th, 1897.



DEAR MADAM:

We are only too happy to comply with your very pleasant request. It is
our desire to be of service to our readers, and if the fact of writing
to us will help them in their studies we shall be only too delighted to
have them write to us as often as they feel inclined.

Pray tell them that we will take pleasure in answering every good letter
that we receive.                       EDITOR.


We take pleasure in publishing the two following letters from our little
friends in Poplar Plains.

All the letters were interesting, and showed that the young readers had
studied THE GREAT ROUND WORLD very carefully. We would have been
delighted to publish them all, but space forbade.        EDITOR.


     DEAR EDITOR:

     Your paper is so very interesting that the teacher reads to
     us some of the stories, one of which I liked very much. It
     was about the forest fires, and we were very anxious to have
     the next paper come. Some of the other scholars of my school
     are going to write and tell you what they think is the best
     story. Good-by,

                            Your friend,
                                    EDNA R.C.
     WESTPORT, CONN., November 12th, 1897.


     DEAR EDITOR:

     My teacher has been reading some very interesting articles
     from your paper, THE GREAT ROUND WORLD. I think the most
     interesting articles were about the forest fires, the
     Klondike regions, and about the large and useful bicycles,
     and about the great wars that are going on now. I think you
     are very kind in sending your paper to the people.

                               Your friend,
                                        IDA B.K.
     WESTPORT, CONN., November 12th, 1897.


     DEAR EDITOR:

     I am very much interested about Cuba and all the wars that
     are going on, also about Klondike.

     I wish you would write something about the mines in Mexico,
     because my father has gone down there to some mines.

                      Yours truly,
                                          W.E.W.
     OGDENSBURG, November 14th, 1897.


DEAR YOUNG FRIEND:

Many thanks for your kind letter.

We will be glad to chat with you about the mines in Mexico as soon as we
can find space.

THE GREAT ROUND WORLD is a _news_paper. We try to tell you week by week
of the important events that have been happening in the world. We have
therefore but little room in our pages for any stories that are not
closely connected with some recent event.

To give you pleasure we will endeavor to make room in the earliest
number possible.

In the mean while, will you not send us an account of the mine to which
your father has gone? He has probably written home to you and told you
some interesting things which we should all like to know. Won't you
write us another letter, giving us your father's account of the mine he
has gone to?

                                                  EDITOR.




INVENTION AND DISCOVERY.


POCKET-KNIFE.--Here is an excellent thing in pocket-knives.

Attached to the handle is a revolving plate which, when the knife is
opened, turns round and catches the blade firmly, making it impossible
for it to close and holding it absolutely rigid.

So many accidents have occurred through the slipping of the pocket-knife
that it seems strange such a simple device as this should not have been
thought of before.

[Illustration: Pocket-knife]

We are aware that there have been several knives made with springs to
hold the blade firmly when open, but these have all been large and
clumsy knives, whereas the one illustrated is really what it pretends to
be--a pocket-knife.

                                                         G.H.R.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is
Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 56, December 2, 1897, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD AND ***

***** This file should be named 16191.txt or 16191.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/6/1/9/16191/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.(www.pgdp.net)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

