The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Confessions Of Nat Turner, by Nat Turner

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Confessions Of Nat Turner
       The Leader Of The Late Insurrections In Southampton, Va. As Fully
       And Voluntarily Made To Thomas R. Gray, In The Prison Where He Was
       Confined, And Acknowledged By Him To Be Such When Read Before The
       Court Of Southampton; With The Certificate, Under Seal Of The Court
       Convened At Jerusalem, Nov. 5, 1831, For His Trial. Also, An Authentic
       Account Of The Whole Insurrection,
       

Author: Nat Turner

Release Date: March 12, 2005 [EBook #15333]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CONFESSIONS OF NAT TURNER ***




Produced by Suzanne Shell, Bruce Thomas and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team






THE CONFESSIONS OF NAT TURNER,

THE LEADER OF THE LATE INSURRECTIONS IN SOUTHAMPTON, VA.

As fully and voluntarily made to

THOMAS R. GRAY,

In the prison where he was confined, and acknowledged by him to be such
when read before the Court of Southampton; with the certificate, under
seal of the Court convened at Jerusalem, Nov. 5, 1831, for his trial.

ALSO, AN AUTHENTIC
ACCOUNT OF THE WHOLE INSURRECTION,
WITH LISTS OF THE WHITES WHO WERE MURDERED,
AND OF THE NEGROES BROUGHT BEFORE THE COURT OF SOUTHAMPTON, AND THERE
SENTENCED, &c.

Baltimore:
PUBLISHED BY THOMAS R. GRAY.
_Lucas & Denver, print._
1831




DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, TO WIT:

_Be it remembered_, That on this tenth day of November, Anno Domini,
eighteen hundred and thirty-one, Thomas R. Gray of the said District,
deposited in this office the title of a book, which is in the words as
following:

"The Confessions of Nat Turner, the leader of the late insurrection in
Southampton, Virginia, as fully and voluntarily made to Thomas R. Gray,
in the prison where he was confined, and acknowledged by him to be such
when read before the Court of Southampton; with the certificate, under
seal, of the Court convened at Jerusalem, November 5, 1831, for his
trial. Also, an authentic account of the whole insurrection, with lists
of the whites who were murdered, and of the negroes brought before the
Court of Southampton, and there sentenced, &c" the right whereof he
claims as proprietor, in conformity with an Act of Congress, entitled
"An act to amend the several acts respecting Copy Rights."
                                 Edmund J. Lee, Clerk of the District.

                          In testimony that the above is a true copy,
                            from the record of the District Court for
               (Seal.)         the District of Columbia, I, Edmund J.
                                Lee, the Clerk thereof, have hereunto
                               set my hand and affixed the seal of my
                             office, this 10th day of November, 1831.

                                                Edmund J. Lee, C.D.C.



TO THE PUBLIC.


The late insurrection in Southampton has greatly excited the public
mind, and led to a thousand idle, exaggerated and mischievous reports.
It is the first instance in our history of an open rebellion of the
slaves, and attended with such atrocious circumstances of cruelty and
destruction, as could not fail to leave a deep impression, not only upon
the minds of the community where this fearful tragedy was wrought, but
throughout every portion of our country, in which this population is to
be found. Public curiosity has been on the stretch to understand the
origin and progress of this dreadful conspiracy, and the motives which
influences its diabolical actors. The insurgent slaves had all been
destroyed, or apprehended, tried and executed, (with the exception of
the leader,) without revealing any thing at all satisfactory, as to the
motives which governed them, or the means by which they expected to
accomplish their object. Every thing connected with this sad affair was
wrapt in mystery, until Nat Turner, the leader of this ferocious band,
whose name has resounded throughout our widely extended empire, was
captured. This "great Bandit" was taken by a single individual, in a
cave near the residence of his late owner, on Sunday, the thirtieth of
October, without attempting to make the slightest resistance, and on the
following day safely lodged in the jail of the County. His captor was
Benjamin Phipps, armed with a shot gun well charged. Nat's only weapon
was a small light sword which he immediately surrendered, and begged
that his life might be spared. Since his confinement, by permission of
the Jailor, I have had ready access to him, and finding that he was
willing to make a full and free confession of the origin, progress and
consummation of the insurrectory movements of the slaves of which he was
the contriver and head; I determined for the gratification of public
curiosity to commit his statements to writing, and publish them, with
little or no variation, from his own words. That this is a faithful
record of his confessions, the annexed certificate of the County Court
of Southampton, will attest. They certainly bear one stamp of truth and
sincerity. He makes no attempt (as all the other insurgents who were
examined did,) to exculpate himself, but frankly acknowledges his full
participation in all the guilt of the transaction. He was not only the
contriver of the conspiracy, but gave the first blow towards its
execution.

It will thus appear, that whilst every thing upon the surface of society
wore a calm and peaceful aspect; whilst not one note of preparation was
heard to warn the devoted inhabitants of woe and death, a gloomy fanatic
was revolving in the recesses of his own dark, bewildered, and
overwrought mind, schemes of indiscriminate massacre to the whites.
Schemes too fearfully executed as far as his fiendish band proceeded in
their desolating march. No cry for mercy penetrated their flinty bosoms.
No acts of remembered kindness made the least impression upon these
remorseless murderers. Men, women and children, from hoary age to
helpless infancy were involved in the same cruel fate. Never did a band
of savages do their work of death more unsparingly. Apprehension for
their own personal safety seems to have been the only principle of
restraint in the whole course of their bloody proceedings. And it is not
the least remarkable feature in this horrid transaction, that a band
actuated by such hellish purposes, should have resisted so feebly, when
met by the whites in arms. Desperation alone, one would think, might
have led to greater efforts. More than twenty of them attacked Dr.
Blunt's house on Tuesday morning, a little before day-break, defended by
two men and three boys. They fled precipitately at the first fire; and
their future plans of mischief, were entirely disconcerted and broken
up. Escaping thence, each individual sought his own safety either in
concealment, or by returning home, with the hope that his participation
might escape detection, and all were shot down in the course of a few
days, or captured and brought to trial and punishment. Nat has survived
all his followers, and the gallows will speedily close his career. His
own account of the conspiracy is submitted to the public, without
comment. It reads an awful, and it is hoped, a useful lesson, as to the
operations of a mind like his, endeavoring to grapple with things beyond
its reach. How it first became bewildered and confounded, and finally
corrupted and led to the conception and perpetration of the most
atrocious and heart-rending deeds. It is calculated also to demonstrate
the policy of our laws in restraint of this class of our population,
and to induce all those entrusted with their execution, as well as our
citizens generally, to see that they are strictly and rigidly enforced.
Each particular community should look to its own safety, whilst the
general guardians of the laws, keep a watchful eye over all. If Nat's
statements can be relied on, the insurrection in this county was
entirely local, and his designs confided but to a few, and these in his
immediate vicinity. It was not instigated by motives of revenge or
sudden anger, but the results of long deliberation, and a settled
purpose of mind. The offspring of gloomy fanaticism, acting upon
materials but too well prepared for such impressions. It will be long
remembered in the annals of our country, and many a mother as she
presses her infant darling to her bosom, will shudder at the
recollection of Nat Turner, and his band of ferocious miscreants.

Believing the following narrative, by removing doubts and conjectures
from the public mind which otherwise must have remained, would give
general satisfaction, it is respectfully submitted to the public by
their ob't serv't,

                                                           T.R. GRAY.
_Jerusalem, Southampton, Va. Nov. 5, 1831._


We the undersigned, members of the Court convened at Jerusalem, on
Saturday, the 5th day of Nov. 1831, for the trial of Nat, _alias_ Nat
Turner, a negro slave, late the property of Putnam Moore, deceased, do
hereby certify, that the confessions of Nat, to Thomas R. Gray, was read
to him in our presence, and that Nat acknowledged the same to be full,
free, and voluntary; and that furthermore, when called upon by the
presiding Magistrate of the Court, to state if he had any thing to say,
why sentence of death should not be passed upon him, replied he had
nothing further than he had communicated to Mr. Gray. Given under our
hands and seals at Jerusalem, this 5th day of November, 1831.
                                            JEREMIAH COBB,   [_Seal_.]
                                            THOMAS PRETLOW,  [_Seal_.]
                                            JAMES W. PARKER, [_Seal_.]
                                            CARR BOWERS,     [_Seal_.]
                                            SAMUEL B. HINES, [_Seal_.]
                                            ORRIS A. BROWNE, [_Seal_.]


_State of Virginia, Southampton County, to wit_:

I, James Rochelle, Clerk of the County Court of Southampton in the State
of Virginia, do hereby certify, that Jeremiah Cobb, Thomas Pretlow,
James W. Parker, Carr Bowers, Samuel B. Hines, and Orris A. Browne,
esqr's are acting Justices of the Peace, in and for the County
aforesaid, and were members of the Court which convened at Jerusalem, on
Saturday the 5th day of November, 1831, for the trial of Nat _alias_ Nat
Turner, a negro slave, late the property of Putnam Moore, deceased, who
was tried and convicted, as an insurgent in the late insurrection in the
county of Southampton aforesaid, and that full faith and credit are due,
and ought to be given to their acts as Justices of the peace aforesaid.
                          In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my
                                 hand and caused the seal of the Court
                   [Seal.]    aforesaid, to be affixed this 5th day of
                                                       November, 1831.
                                           James Rochelle, C.S.C.C.




CONFESSION.


Agreeable to his own appointment, on the evening he was committed to
prison, with permission of the jailer, I visited NAT on Tuesday the 1st
November, when, without being questioned at all, he commenced his
narrative in the following words:--


Sir,--You have asked me to give a history of the motives which induced
me to undertake the late insurrection, as you call it--To do so I must
go back to the days of my infancy, and even before I was born. I was
thirty-one years of age the 2d of October last, and born the property of
Benj. Turner, of this county. In my childhood a circumstance occurred
which made an indelible impression on my mind, and laid the ground work
of that enthusiasm, which has terminated so fatally to many, both white
and black, and for which I am about to atone at the gallows. It is here
necessary to relate this circumstance--trifling as it may seem, it was
the commencement of that belief which has grown with time, and even now,
sir, in this dungeon, helpless and forsaken as I am, I cannot divest
myself of. Being at play with other children, when three or four years
old, I was telling them something, which my mother overhearing, said it
had happened before I was born--I stuck to my story, however, and
related somethings which went, in her opinion, to confirm it--others
being called on were greatly astonished, knowing that these things had
happened, and caused them to say in my hearing, I surely would be a
prophet, as the Lord had shewn me things that had happened before my
birth. And my father and mother strengthened me in this my first
impression, saying in my presence, I was intended for some great
purpose, which they had always thought from certain marks on my head and
breast--[a parcel of excrescences which I believe are not at all
uncommon, particularly among negroes, as I have seen several with the
same. In this case he has either cut them off or they have nearly
disappeared]--My grand mother, who was very religious, and to whom I was
much attached--my master, who belonged to the church, and other
religious persons who visited the house, and whom I often saw at
prayers, noticing the singularity of my manners, I suppose, and my
uncommon intelligence for a child, remarked I had too much sense to be
raised, and if I was, I would never be of any service to any one as a
slave--To a mind like mine, restless, inquisitive and observant of every
thing that was passing, it is easy to suppose that religion was the
subject to which it would be directed, and although this subject
principally occupied my thoughts--there was nothing that I saw or heard
of to which my attention was not directed--The manner in which I learned
to read and write, not only had great influence on my own mind, as I
acquired it with the most perfect ease, so much so, that I have no
recollection whatever of learning the alphabet--but to the astonishment
of the family, one day, when a book was shewn me to keep me from crying,
I began spelling the names of different objects--this was a source of
wonder to all in the neighborhood, particularly the blacks--and this
learning was constantly improved at all opportunities--when I got large
enough to go to work, while employed, I was reflecting on many things
that would present themselves to my imagination, and whenever an
opportunity occurred of looking at a book, when the school children were
getting their lessons, I would find many things that the fertility of my
own imagination had depicted to me before; all my time, not devoted to
my master's service, was spent either in prayer, or in making
experiments in casting different things in moulds made of earth, in
attempting to make paper, gunpowder, and many other experiments, that
although I could not perfect, yet convinced me of its practicability if
I had the means.[Footnote: When questioned as to the manner of
manufacturing those different articles, he was found well informed on
the subject.] I was not addicted to stealing in my youth, nor have ever
been--Yet such was the confidence of the negroes in the neighborhood,
even at this early period of my life, in my superior judgment, that they
would often carry me with them when they were going on any roguery, to
plan for them. Growing up among them, with this confidence in my
superior judgment, and when this, in their opinions, was perfected by
Divine inspiration, from the circumstances already alluded to in my
infancy, and which belief was ever afterwards zealously inculcated by
the austerity of my life and manners, which became the subject of remark
by white and black.--Having soon discovered to be great, I must appear
so, and therefore studiously avoided mixing in society, and wrapped
myself in mystery, devoting my time to fasting and prayer--By this time,
having arrived to man's estate, and hearing the scriptures commented on
at meetings, I was struck with that particular passage which says: "Seek
ye the kingdom of Heaven and all things shall be added unto you." I
reflected much on this passage, and prayed daily for light on this
subject--As I was praying one day at my plough, the spirit spoke to me,
saying, "Seek ye the kingdom of Heaven and all things shall be added
unto you." _Question_--what do you mean by the Spirit. _Ans._ The Spirit
that spoke to the prophets in former days--and I was greatly astonished,
and for two years prayed continually, whenever my duty would permit--and
then again I had the same revelation, which fully confirmed me in the
impression that I was ordained for some great purpose in the hands of
the Almighty. Several years rolled round, in which many events occurred
to strengthen me in this my belief. At this time I reverted in my mind
to the remarks made of me in my childhood, and the things that had been
shewn me--and as it had been said of me in my childhood by those by whom
I had been taught to pray, both white and black, and in whom I had the
greatest confidence, that I had too much sense to be raised, and if I
was, I would never be of any use to any one as a slave. Now finding I
had arrived to man's estate, and was a slave, and these revelations
being made known to me, I began to direct my attention to this great
object, to fulfil the purpose for which, by this time, I felt assured I
was intended. Knowing the influence I had obtained over the minds of my
fellow servants, (not by the means of conjuring and such like
tricks--for to them I always spoke of such things with contempt) but by
the communion of the Spirit whose revelations I often communicated to
them, and they believed and said my wisdom came from God. I now began to
prepare them for my purpose, by telling them something was about to
happen that would terminate in fulfilling the great promise that had
been made to me--About this time I was placed under an overseer, from
whom I ran away--and after remaining in the woods thirty days, I
returned, to the astonishment of the negroes on the plantation, who
thought I had made my escape to some other part of the country, as my
father had done before. But the reason of my return was, that the Spirit
appeared to me and said I had my wishes directed to the things of this
world, and not to the kingdom of Heaven, and that I should return to the
service of my earthly master--"For he who knoweth his Master's will, and
doeth it not, shall be beaten with many stripes, and thus have I
chastened you." And the negroes found fault, and murmurred against me,
saying that if they had my sense they would not serve any master in the
world. And about this time I had a vision--and I saw white spirits and
black spirits engaged in battle, and the sun was darkened--the thunder
rolled in the Heavens, and blood flowed in streams--and I heard a voice
saying, "Such is your luck, such you are called to see, and let it come
rough or smooth, you must surely bare it." I now withdrew myself as much
as my situation would permit, from the intercourse of my fellow
servants, for the avowed purpose of serving the Spirit more fully--and
it appeared to me, and reminded me of the things it had already shown
me, and that it would then reveal to me the knowledge of the elements,
the revolution of the planets, the operation of tides, and changes of
the seasons. After this revelation in the year 1825, and the knowledge
of the elements being made known to me, I sought more than ever to
obtain true holiness before the great day of judgment should appear, and
then I began to receive the true knowledge of faith. And from the first
steps of righteousness until the last, was I made perfect; and the Holy
Ghost was with me, and said, "Behold me as I stand in the Heavens"--and
I looked and saw the forms of men in different attitudes--and there were
lights in the sky to which the children of darkness gave other names
than what they really were--for they were the lights of the Saviour's
hands, stretched forth from east to west, even as they were extended on
the cross on Calvary for the redemption of sinners. And I wondered
greatly at these miracles, and prayed to be informed of a certainty of
the meaning thereof--and shortly afterwards, while laboring in the
field, I discovered drops of blood on the corn as though it were dew
from heaven--and I communicated it to many, both white and black, in the
neighborhood--and I then found on the leaves in the woods hieroglyphic
characters, and numbers, with the forms of men in different attitudes,
portrayed in blood, and representing the figures I had seen before in
the heavens. And now the Holy Ghost had revealed itself to me, and made
plain the miracles it had shown me--For as the blood of Christ had been
shed on this earth, and had ascended to heaven for the salvation of
sinners, and was now returning to earth again in the form of dew--and as
the leaves on the trees bore the impression of the figures I had seen in
the heavens, it was plain to me that the Saviour was about to lay down
the yoke he had borne for the sins of men, and the great day of judgment
was at hand. About this time I told these things to a white man,
(Etheldred T. Brantley) on whom it had a wonderful effect--and he ceased
from his wickedness, and was attacked immediately with a cutaneous
eruption, and blood ozed from the pores of his skin, and after praying
and fasting nine days, he was healed, and the Spirit appeared to me
again, and said, as the Saviour had been baptised so should we be
also--and when the white people would not let us be baptised by the
church, we went down into the water together, in the sight of many who
reviled us, and were baptised by the Spirit--After this I rejoiced
greatly, and gave thanks to God. And on the 12th of May, 1828, I heard a
loud noise in the heavens, and the Spirit instantly appeared to me and
said the Serpent was loosened, and Christ had laid down the yoke he had
borne for the sins of men, and that I should take it on and fight
against the Serpent, for the time was fast approaching when the first
should be last and the last should be first. _Ques._ Do you not find
yourself mistaken now? _Ans._ Was not Christ crucified. And by signs in
the heavens that it would make known to me when I should commence the
great work--and until the first sign appeared, I should conceal it from
the knowledge of men--And on the appearance of the sign, (the eclipse of
the sun last February) I should arise and prepare myself, and slay my
enemies with their own weapons. And immediately on the sign appearing in
the heavens, the seal was removed from my lips, and I communicated the
great work laid out for me to do, to four in whom I had the greatest
confidence, (Henry, Hark, Nelson, and Sam)--It was intended by us to
have begun the work of death on the 4th July last--Many were the plans
formed and rejected by us, and it affected my mind to such a degree,
that I fell sick, and the time passed without our coming to any
determination how to commence--Still forming new schemes and rejecting
them, when the sign appeared again, which determined me not to wait
longer.

Since the commencement of 1830, I had been living with Mr. Joseph
Travis, who was to me a kind master, and placed the greatest confidence
in me; in fact, I had no cause to complain of his treatment to me. On
Saturday evening, the 20th of August, it was agreed between Henry, Hark
and myself, to prepare a dinner the next day for the men we expected,
and then to concert a plan, as we had not yet determined on any. Hark,
on the following morning, brought a pig, and Henry brandy, and being
joined by Sam, Nelson, Will and Jack, they prepared in the woods a
dinner, where, about three o'clock, I joined them.

_Q._ Why were you so backward in joining them.

_A._ The same reason that had caused me not to mix with them for years
before.

I saluted them on coming up, and asked Will how came he there, he
answered, his life was worth no more than others, and his liberty as
dear to him. I asked him if he thought to obtain it? He said he would,
or loose his life. This was enough to put him in full confidence. Jack,
I knew, was only a tool in the hands of Hark, it was quickly agreed we
should commence at home (Mr. J. Travis') on that night, and until we had
armed and equipped ourselves, and gathered sufficient force, neither age
nor sex was to be spared, (which was invariably adhered to.) We remained
at the feast, until about two hours in the night, when we went to the
house and found Austin; they all went to the cider press and drank,
except myself. On returning to the house, Hark went to the door with an
axe, for the purpose of breaking it open, as we knew we were strong
enough to murder the family, if they were awaked by the noise; but
reflecting that it might create an alarm in the neighborhood, we
determined to enter the house secretly, and murder them whilst sleeping.
Hark got a ladder and set it against the chimney, on which I ascended,
and hoisting a window, entered and came down stairs, unbarred the door,
and removed the guns from their places. It was then observed that I must
spill the first blood. On which, armed with a hatchet, and accompanied
by Will, I entered my master's chamber, it being dark, I could not give
a death blow, the hatchet glanced from his head, he sprang from the bed
and called his wife, it was his last word, Will laid him dead, with a
blow of his axe, and Mrs. Travis shared the same fate, as she lay in
bed. The murder of this family, five in number, was the work of a
moment, not one of them awoke; there was a little infant sleeping in a
cradle, that was forgotten, until we had left the house and gone some
distance, when Henry and Will returned and killed it; we got here, four
guns that would shoot, and several old muskets, with a pound or two of
powder. We remained some time at the barn, where we paraded; I formed
them in a line as soldiers, and after carrying them through all the
manoeuvres I was master of, marched them off to Mr. Salathul Francis',
about six hundred yards distant. Sam and Will went to the door and
knocked. Mr. Francis asked who was there, Sam replied it was him, and he
had a letter for him, on which he got up and came to the door; they
immediately seized him, and dragging him out a little from the door, he
was dispatched by repeated blows on the head; there was no other white
person in the family. We started from there for Mrs. Reese's,
maintaining the most perfect silence on our march, where finding the
door unlocked, we entered, and murdered Mrs. Reese in her bed, while
sleeping; her son awoke, but it was only to sleep the sleep of death, he
had only time to say who is that, and he was no more. From Mrs. Reese's
we went to Mrs. Turner's, a mile distant, which we reached about
sunrise, on Monday morning. Henry, Austin, and Sam, went to the still,
where, finding Mr. Peebles, Austin shot him, and the rest of us went to
the house; as we approached, the family discovered us, and shut the
door. Vain hope! Will, with one stroke of his axe, opened it, and we
entered and found Mrs. Turner and Mrs. Newsome in the middle of a room,
almost frightened to death. Will immediately killed Mrs. Turner, with
one blow of his axe. I took Mrs. Newsome by the hand, and with the
sword I had when I was apprehended, I struck her several blows over the
head, but not being able to kill her, as the sword was dull. Will
turning around and discovering it, despatched her also. A general
destruction of property and search for money and ammunition, always
succeeded the murders. By this time my company amounted to fifteen, and
nine men mounted, who started for Mrs. Whitehead's, (the other six were
to go through a by way to Mr. Bryant's, and rejoin us at Mrs.
Whitehead's,) as we approached the house we discovered Mr. Richard
Whitehead standing in the cotton patch, near the lane fence; we called
him over into the lane, and Will, the executioner, was near at hand,
with his fatal axe, to send him to an untimely grave. As we pushed on to
the house, I discovered some one run round the garden, and thinking it
was some of the white family, I pursued them, but finding it was a
servant girl belonging to the house, I returned to commence the work of
death, but they whom I left, had not been idle; all the family were
already murdered, but Mrs. Whitehead and her daughter Margaret. As I
came round to the door I saw Will pulling Mrs. Whitehead out of the
house, and at the step he nearly severed her head from her body, with
his broad axe. Miss Margaret, when I discovered her, had concealed
herself in the corner, formed by the projection of the cellar cap from
the house; on my approach she fled, but was soon overtaken, and after
repeated blows with a sword, I killed her by a blow on the head, with a
fence rail. By this time, the six who had gone by Mr. Bryant's, rejoined
us, and informed me they had done the work of death assigned them. We
again divided, part going to Mr. Richard Porter's, and from thence to
Nathaniel Francis', the others to Mr. Howell Harris', and Mr. T. Doyles.
On my reaching Mr. Porter's, he had escaped with his family. I
understood there, that the alarm had already spread, and I immediately
returned to bring up those sent to Mr. Doyles, and Mr. Howell Harris';
the party I left going on to Mr. Francis', having told them I would join
them in that neighborhood. I met these sent to Mr. Doyles' and Mr.
Harris' returning, having met Mr. Doyle on the road and killed him; and
learning from some who joined them, that Mr. Harris was from home, I
immediately pursued the course taken by the party gone on before; but
knowing they would complete the work of death and pillage, at Mr.
Francis' before I could get there, I went to Mr. Peter Edwards',
expecting to find them there, but they had been here also. I then went
to Mr. John T. Barrow's, they had been here and murdered him. I pursued
on their track to Capt. Newit Harris', where I found the greater part
mounted, and ready to start; the men now amounting to about forty,
shouted and hurraed as I rode up, some were in the yard, loading their
guns, others drinking. They said Captain Harris and his family had
escaped, the property in the house they destroyed, robbing him of money
and other valuables. I ordered them to mount and march instantly, this
was about nine or ten o'clock, Monday morning. I proceeded to Mr. Levi
Waller's, two or three miles distant. I took my station in the rear, and
as it 'twas my object to carry terror and devastation wherever we went,
I placed fifteen or twenty of the best armed and most to be relied on,
in front, who generally approached the houses as fast as their horses
could run; this was for two purposes, to prevent their escape and strike
terror to the inhabitants--on this account I never got to the houses,
after leaving Mrs. Whitehead's, until the murders were committed, except
in one case. I sometimes got in sight in time to see the work of death
completed, viewed the mangled bodies as they lay, in silent
satisfaction, and immediately started in quest of other victims--Having
murdered Mrs. Waller and ten children, we started for Mr. William
Williams'--having killed him and two little boys that were there; while
engaged in this, Mrs. Williams fled and got some distance from the
house, but she was pursued, overtaken, and compelled to get up behind
one of the company, who brought her back, and after showing her the
mangled body of her lifeless husband, she was told to get down and lay
by his side, where she was shot dead. I then started for Mr. Jacob
Williams, where the family were murdered--Here we found a young man
named Drury, who had come on business with Mr. Williams--he was pursued,
overtaken and shot. Mrs. Vaughan was the next place we visited--and
after murdering the family here, I determined on starting for
Jerusalem--Our number amounted now to fifty or sixty, all mounted and
armed with guns, axes, swords and clubs--On reaching Mr. James W.
Parkers' gate, immediately on the road leading to Jerusalem, and about
three miles distant, it was proposed to me to call there, but I
objected, as I knew he was gone to Jerusalem, and my object was to reach
there as soon as possible; but some of the men having relations at Mr.
Parker's it was agreed that they might call and get his people. I
remained at the gate on the road, with seven or eight; the others going
across the field to the house, about half a mile off. After waiting some
time for them, I became impatient, and started to the house for them,
and on our return we were met by a party of white men, who had pursued
our bloodstained track, and who had fired on those at the gate, and
dispersed them, which I new nothing of, not having been at that time
rejoined by any of them--Immediately on discovering the whites, I
ordered my men to halt and form, as they appeared to be alarmed--The
white men, eighteen in number, approached us in about one hundred yards,
when one of them fired, (this was against the positive orders of Captain
Alexander P. Peete, who commanded, and who had directed the men to
reserve their fire until within thirty paces) And I discovered about
half of them retreating, I then ordered my men to fire and rush on them;
the few remaining stood their ground until we approached within fifty
yards, when they fired and retreated. We pursued and overtook some of
them who we thought we left dead; (they were not killed) after pursuing
them about two hundred yards, and rising a little hill, I discovered
they were met by another party, and had haulted, and were re-loading
their guns, (this was a small party from Jerusalem who knew the negroes
were in the field, and had just tied their horses to await their return
to the road, knowing that Mr. Parker and family were in Jerusalem, but
knew nothing of the party that had gone in with Captain Peete; on
hearing the firing they immediately rushed to the spot and arrived just
in time to arrest the progress of these barbarous villians, and save the
lives of their friends and fellow citizens.) Thinking that those who
retreated first, and the party who fired on us at fifty or sixty yards
distant, had all only fallen back to meet others with amunition. As I
saw them re-loading their guns, and more coming up than I saw at first,
and several of my bravest men being wounded, the others became panick
struck and squandered over the field; the white men pursued and fired
on us several times. Hark had his horse shot under him, and I caught
another for him as it was running by me; five or six of my men were
wounded, but none left on the field; finding myself defeated here I
instantly determined to go through a private way, and cross the Nottoway
river at the Cypress Bridge, three miles below Jerusalem, and attack
that place in the rear, as I expected they would look for me on the
other road, and I had a great desire to get there to procure arms and
amunition. After going a short distance in this private way, accompanied
by about twenty men, I overtook two or three who told me the others were
dispersed in every direction. After trying in vain to collect a
sufficient force to proceed to Jerusalem, I determined to return, as I
was sure they would make back to their old neighborhood, where they
would rejoin me, make new recruits, and come down again. On my way back,
I called at Mrs. Thomas's, Mrs. Spencer's, and several other places, the
white families having fled, we found no more victims to gratify our
thirst for blood, we stopped at Majr. Ridley's quarter for the night,
and being joined by four of his men, with the recruits made since my
defeat, we mustered now about forty strong. After placing out sentinels,
I laid down to sleep, but was quickly roused by a great racket; starting
up, I found some mounted, and others in great confusion; one of the
sentinels having given the alarm that we were about to be attacked, I
ordered some to ride round and reconnoitre, and on their return the
others being more alarmed, not knowing who they were, fled in different
ways, so that I was reduced to about twenty again; with this I
determined to attempt to recruit, and proceed on to rally in the
neighborhood, I had left. Dr. Blunt's was the nearest house, which we
reached just before day; on riding up the yard, Hark fired a gun. We
expected Dr. Blunt and his family were at Maj. Ridley's, as I knew there
was a company of men there; the gun was fired to ascertain if any of the
family were at home; we were immediately fired upon and retreated,
leaving several of my men. I do not know what became of them, as I never
saw them afterwards. Pursuing our course back and coming in sight of
Captain Harris', where we had been the day before, we discovered a party
of white men at the house, on which all deserted me but two, (Jacob and
Nat,) we concealed ourselves in the woods until near night, when I sent
them in search of Henry, Sam, Nelson, and Hark, and directed them to
rally all they could, at the place we had had our dinner the Sunday
before, where they would find me, and I accordingly returned there as
soon as it was dark and remained until Wednesday evening, when
discovering white men riding around the place as though they were
looking for some one, and none of my men joining me, I concluded Jacob
and Nat had been taken, and compelled to betray me. On this I gave up
all hope for the present; and on Thursday night after having supplied
myself with provisions from Mr. Travis's, I scratched a hole under a
pile of fence rails in a field, where I concealed myself for six weeks,
never leaving my hiding place but for a few minutes in the dead of night
to get water which was very near; thinking by this time I could venture
out, I began to go about in the night and eaves drop the houses in the
neighborhood; pursuing this course for about a fortnight and gathering
little or no intelligence, afraid of speaking to any human being, and
returning every morning to my cave before the dawn of day. I know not
how long I might have led this life, if accident had not betrayed me, a
dog in the neighborhood passing by my hiding place one night while I was
out, was attracted by some meat I had in my cave, and crawled in and
stole it, and was coming out just as I returned. A few nights after, two
negroes having started to go hunting with the same dog, and passed that
way, the dog came again to the place, and having just gone out to walk
about, discovered me and barked, on which thinking myself discovered, I
spoke to them to beg concealment. On making myself known they fled from
me. Knowing then they would betray me, I immediately left my hiding
place, and was pursued almost incessantly until I was taken a fortnight
afterwards by Mr. Benjamin Phipps, in a little hole I had dug out with
my sword, for the purpose of concealment, under the top of a fallen
tree. On Mr. Phipps' discovering the place of my concealment, he cocked
his gun and aimed at me. I requested him not to shoot and I would give
up, upon which he demanded my sword. I delivered it to him, and he
brought me to prison. During the time I was pursued, I had many hair
breadth escapes, which your time will not permit you to relate. I am
here loaded with chains, and willing to suffer the fate that awaits me.

I here proceeded to make some inquiries of him, after assuring him of
the certain death that awaited him, and that concealment would only
bring destruction on the innocent as well as guilty, of his own color,
if he knew of any extensive or concerted plan. His answer was, I do not.
When I questioned him as to the insurrection in North Carolina happening
about the same time, he denied any knowledge of it; and when I looked
him in the face as though I would search his inmost thoughts, he
replied, "I see sir, you doubt my word; but can you not think the same
ideas, and strange appearances about this time in the heaven's might
prompt others, as well as myself, to this undertaking." I now had much
conversation with and asked him many questions, having forborne to do so
previously, except in the cases noted in parenthesis; but during his
statement, I had, unnoticed by him, taken notes as to some particular
circumstances, and having the advantage of his statement before me in
writing, on the evening of the third day that I had been with him, I
began a cross examination, and found his statement corroborated by every
circumstance coming within my own knowledge or the confessions of others
whom had been either killed or executed, and whom he had not seen nor
had any knowledge since 22d of August last, he expressed himself fully
satisfied as to the impracticability of his attempt. It has been said he
was ignorant and cowardly, and that his object was to murder and rob for
the purpose of obtaining money to make his escape. It is notorious, that
he was never known to have a dollar in his life; to swear an oath, or
drink a drop of spirits. As to his ignorance, he certainly never had the
advantages of education, but he can read and write, (it was taught him
by his parents,) and for natural intelligence and quickness of
apprehension, is surpassed by few men I have ever seen. As to his being
a coward, his reason as given for not resisting Mr. Phipps, shews the
decision of his character. When he saw Mr. Phipps present his gun, he
said he knew it was impossible for him to escape as the woods were full
of men; he therefore thought it was better to surrender, and trust to
fortune for his escape. He is a complete fanatic, or plays his part most
admirably. On other subjects he possesses an uncommon share of
intelligence, with a mind capable of attaining any thing; but warped and
perverted by the influence of early impressions. He is below the
ordinary stature, though strong and active, having the true negro face,
every feature of which is strongly marked. I shall not attempt to
describe the effect of his narrative, as told and commented on by
himself, in the condemned hole of the prison. The calm, deliberate
composure with which he spoke of his late deeds and intentions, the
expression of his fiend-like face when excited by enthusiasm, still
bearing the stains of the blood of helpless innocence about him; clothed
with rags and covered with chains; yet daring to raise his manacled
hands to heaven, with a spirit soaring above the attributes of man; I
looked on him and my blood curdled in my veins.

I will not shock the feelings of humanity, nor wound afresh the bosoms
of the disconsolate sufferers in this unparalleled and inhuman massacre,
by detailing the deeds of their fiend-like barbarity. There were two or
three who were in the power of these wretches, had they known it, and
who escaped in the most providential manner. There were two whom they
thought they left dead on the field at Mr. Parker's, but who were only
stunned by the blows of their guns, as they did not take time to re-load
when they charged on them. The escape of a little girl who went to
school at Mr. Waller's, and where the children were collecting for that
purpose, excited general sympathy. As their teacher had not arrived,
they were at play in the yard, and seeing the negroes approach, she ran
up on a dirt chimney, (such as are common to log houses,) and remained
there unnoticed during the massacre of the eleven that were killed at
this place. She remained on her hiding place till just before the
arrival of a party, who were in pursuit of the murderers, when she came
down and fled to a swamp, where, a mere child as she was, with the
horrors of the late scene before her, she lay concealed until the next
day, when seeing a party go up to the house, she came up, and on being
asked how she escaped, replied with the utmost simplicity, "The Lord
helped her." She was taken up behind a gentleman of the party, and
returned to the arms of her weeping mother. Miss Whitehead concealed
herself between the bed and the mat that supported it, while they
murdered her sister in the same room, without discovering her. She was
afterwards carried off, and concealed for protection by a slave of the
family, who gave evidence against several of them on their trial. Mrs.
Nathaniel Francis, while concealed in a closet heard their blows, and
the shrieks of the victims of these ruthless savages; they then entered
the closet where she was concealed, and went out without discovering
her. While in this hiding place, she heard two of her women in a quarrel
about the division of her clothes. Mr. John T. Baron, discovering them
approaching his house, told his wife to make her escape, and scorning to
fly, fell fighting on his own threshold. After firing his rifle, he
discharged his gun at them, and then broke it over the villain who first
approached him, but he was overpowered, and slain. His bravery, however,
saved from the hands of these monsters, his lovely and amiable wife, who
will long lament a husband so deserving of her love. As directed by him,
she attempted to escape through the garden, when she was caught and held
by one of her servant girls, but another coming to her rescue, she fled
to the woods, and concealed herself. Few indeed, were those who escaped
their work of death. But fortunate for society, the hand of retributive
justice has overtaken them; and not one that was known to be concerned
has escaped.


           The Commonwealth, }
                  vs.        }       Charged with making insurrection,
              Nat Turner.    }  and plotting to take away the lives of
                                        divers free white persons, &c.
                                           on the 22d of August, 1831.

The court composed of----, having met for the trial of Nat Turner, the
prisoner was brought in and arraigned, and upon his arraignment pleaded
_Not guilty_, saying to his counsel, that he did not feel so.

On the part of the Commonwealth, Levi Waller was introduced, who being
sworn, deposed as follows: (_agreeably to Nat's own Confession_.) Col.
Trezvant[Footnote: The committing Magistrate.] was then introduced, who
being sworn, numerated Nat's Confession to him, as follows: (_his
Confession as given to Mr. Gray_.) The prisoner introduced no evidence,
and the case was submitted without argument to the court, who having
found him guilty, Jeremiah Cobb, Esq. Chairman, pronounced the sentence
of the court, in the following words: "Nat Turner! Stand up. Have you
any thing to say why sentence of death should not be pronounced against
you?"

_Ans._ I have not. I have made a full confession to Mr. Gray, and I have
nothing more to say.

Attend then to the sentence of the Court. You have been arraigned and
tried before this court, and convicted of one of the highest crimes in
our criminal code. You have been convicted of plotting in cold blood,
the indiscriminate destruction of men, of helpless women, and of infant
children. The evidence before us leaves not a shadow of doubt, but that
your hands were often imbrued in the blood of the innocent; and your own
confession tells us that they were stained with the blood of a master;
in your own language, "too indulgent." Could I stop here, your crime
would be sufficiently aggravated. But the original contriver of a plan,
deep and deadly, one that never can be effected, you managed so far to
put it into execution, as to deprive us of many of our most valuable
citizens; and this was done when they were asleep, and defenceless;
under circumstances shocking to humanity. And while upon this part of
the subject, I cannot but call your attention to the poor misguided
wretches who have gone before you. They are not few in number--they were
your bosom associates; and the blood of all cries aloud, and calls upon
you, as the author of their misfortune. Yes! You forced them unprepared,
from Time to Eternity. Borne down by this load of guilt, your only
justification is, that you were led away by fanaticism. If this be true,
from my soul I pity you; and while you have my sympathies, I am,
nevertheless called upon to pass the sentence of the court. The time
between this and your execution, will necessarily be very short; and
your only hope must be in another world. The judgment of the court is,
that you be taken hence to the jail from whence you came, thence to the
place of execution, and on Friday next, between the hours of 10 A.M. and
2 P.M. be hung by the neck until you are dead! dead! dead! and may the
Lord have mercy upon your soul.


_A list of persons murdered in the Insurrection, on the 21st and 22d of
August, 1831._

Joseph Travers and wife and three children, Mrs. Elizabeth Turner,
Hartwell Prebles, Sarah Newsome, Mrs. P. Reese and son William, Trajan
Doyle, Henry Bryant and wife and child, and wife's mother, Mrs.
Catharine Whitehead, son Richard and four daughters and grand-child,
Salathiel Francis, Nathaniel Francis' overseer and two children, John T.
Barrow, George Vaughan, Mrs. Levi Waller and ten children, William
Williams, wife and two boys, Mrs. Caswell Worrell and child, Mrs.
Rebecca Vaughan, Ann Eliza Vaughan, and son Arthur, Mrs. John K.
Williams and child, Mrs. Jacob Williams and three children, and Edwin
Drury--amounting to fifty-five.


_A List of Negroes brought before the Court of Southampton, with their
owners' names, and sentence._

Daniel,                Richard Porter,         Convicted.
Moses,                 J.T. Barrow,              Do.
Tom,                   Caty Whitehead,         Discharged.
Jack and Andrew,       Caty Whitehead,         Con. and transported.
Jacob,                 Geo. H. Charlton,       Disch'd without trial.
Isaac,                 Ditto,                  Convi. and transported.
Jack,                  Everett Bryant,         Discharged.
Nathan,                Benj. Blunt's estate,   Convicted.
Nathan, Tom, and
  Davy, (boys,)        Nathaniel Francis,      Convicted and transported.
Davy,                  Elizabeth Turner,       Convicted.
Curtis,                Thomas Ridley,            Do.
Stephen,                   Do.                   Do.
Hardy and Isham,       Benjamin Edwards,       Convicted and transp'd.
Sam,                   Nathaniel Francis,      Convicted.
Hark,                  Joseph Travis' estate.    Do.
Moses, (a boy,)            Do.                   Do. and transported
Davy,                  Levi Waller,            Convicted.
Nelson,                Jacob Williams,           Do.
Nat,                   Edm'd Turner's estate,    Do.
Jack,                  Wm. Reese's estate,       Do.
Dred,                  Nathaniel Francis,        Do.
Arnold, Artist, (free,)                        Discharged.
Sam,                   J.W. Parker,            Acquitted.
Ferry and Archer,      J.W. Parker,            Disch'd without trial.
Jim,                   William Vaughan,        Acquitted.
Bob,                   Temperance Parker,        Do.
Davy,                  Joseph Parker,
Daniel,                Solomon D. Parker,      Disch'd without trial.
Thomas Haithcock, (free,)                        Sent on for further trial.
Joe,                   John C. Turner,         Convicted.
Lucy,                  John T. Barrow,           Do.
Matt,                  Thomas Ridley,          Acquitted.
Jim,                   Richard Porter,           Do.
Exum Artes, (free,)                            Sent on for further trial.
Joe,                   Richard P. Briggs,      Disch'd without trial.
Bury Newsome, (free,)                          Sent on for further trial.
Stephen                James Bell,             Acquitted.
Jim and Isaac,         Samuel Champion,        Convicted and trans'd.
Preston,               Hannah Williamson,      Acquitted.
Frank,                 Solomon D. Parker,      Convi'd and transp'd.
Jack and Shadrach,     Nathaniel Simmons,      Acquitted.
Nelson,                Benj. Blunt's estate,     Do.
Sam,                   Peter Edwards,          Convicted.
Archer,                Arthur G. Reese,        Acquitted.
Isham Turner, (free,)                          Sent on for further trial.
Nat Turner,            Putnam Moore, dec'd,    Convicted.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Confessions Of Nat Turner, by Nat Turner

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CONFESSIONS OF NAT TURNER ***

***** This file should be named 15333.txt or 15333.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/5/3/3/15333/

Produced by Suzanne Shell, Bruce Thomas and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
