The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Lecture on Physical Development, and its
Relations to Mental and Spiritual Development, delivered before the American Institute of Instruction, at their Twenty-Ninth Annual Meeting, in Norwich, Conn., August 20, 1858, by S.R. Calthrop

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A Lecture on Physical Development, and its Relations to Mental and Spiritual Development, delivered before the American Institute of Instruction, at their Twenty-Ninth Annual Meeting, in Norwich, Conn., August 20, 1858

Author: S.R. Calthrop

Release Date: May 25, 2004 [EBook #12430]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A LECTURE ON PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT ***




Produced by Curtis Weyant, Kelsey Innis and PG Distributed Proofreaders




A
Lecture
On
Physical Development, and its Relations to
Mental and Spiritual Development,

delivered before the
American Institute of Instruction,
at their
Twenty-Ninth Annual Meeting,
in
Norwich, Conn., August 20, 1858.


By
S.R. Calthrop,
of Bridgeport, Conn.,
Formerly of Trinity College, Cambridge, England.


MDCCCLIX.

Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1858, by Ticknor And
Fields, In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the District of
Massachusetts.

On motion of G.F. Thayer,--_Voted_, unanimously, That five thousand
copies of Mr. Calthrop's Lecture be printed at the expense of the
Institute, for gratuitous circulation.




LECTURE.


Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen:--

We have met together to consider the best methods of Educating, that is,
drawing out, or developing the Human Nature common to all of us. Truly a
subject not easy to be exhausted. For we all of us feel that the Human
Nature,--out of whose bosom has flowed all history, all science, all
poetry, all art, all life in short,--contains within itself far more
than that which has hitherto been manifested through all the periods of
its history, though that history dates from the creation of the world,
and has already progressed as far as the nineteenth century of the
Christian era. Yes! we all of us feel that the land of promise lies far
away in the future, that the goal of human history is yet a long way
off.

A large portion of this assembly consists of those whose business it is
to study Human Nature in all its various forms, and who have taken upon
themselves the task of developing that nature in the youth of America,
in that rising generation whose duty it will be to carry out the nascent
projects of reform in every department of human interest, and make the
thought of to-day the fact of tomorrow.

Some doubtless there are among this number, who by very nature are born
Teachers, called to this office, as by a voice from heaven! Men, who in
spite of foolish detraction, or yet more foolish patronage, understand
the dignity, the true nobility of their calling; who know that the
office of the teacher is coeval with the world; and also feel with true
prophetic foresight, that the world, fifty years hence, will be very
much what its Teachers intend, by God's blessing, to make it.

Brothers in a high calling! The speaker, proudly enrolling himself in
the number of your noble band, greets you from his heart this day, and
invites you to spend a thoughtful hour with him; and to help him, by
your best wishes, to unfold in a manner not wholly unworthy of his
theme, some small portion of the nature and method of Human Development.

Ours is the age of analysis. We begin to see that before we can
understand a substance, it is necessary to become acquainted with all
its component parts. Thus, then, with regard to Human Nature, we must
understand all at least of its grand divisions, before we can comprehend
the method of developing it as a whole.

Let us then say, that there are five grand divisions in Human
Nature,--the physical, the intellectual, the affectional, the moral, and
the devotional,--or in other words, that man has body, mind, heart,
conscience, and soul.

Concerning these great divisions, I shall assert, _first_, that they are
all mutually dependent upon each other; that if one of them suffer, all
the others suffer with it; that man is dwarfed and incomplete, unless he
is fully developed in all the five: and, _secondly_, as my special
subject, I maintain that physical well-being, health of body, is
therefore necessary not only to the complete development of Human
Nature, but that it is also essential to a happy and harmonious
development of each one of the four other great divisions of Human
Nature; or in other words, I assert the body has something to do both
with the mind, heart, conscience, and soul of man, not merely to all
these collectively, but also to each of them separately.

First, then, I shall speak on the mutual dependence of the faculties.

Now, although it is not possible that any faculty should be so
completely isolated, as to act without moving any of the rest at all;
nevertheless, since a comparative isolation and separation of the
faculties is but too common, let us glance through the history of the
past, and mark any notable instances of such isolation; and if we find
that a one-sided development has always proved a failure, we shall begin
to discern the folly of trying such disastrous experiments over again,
specially since they would have to be made upon living human beings,
upon he young children of the rising generation, who cannot resent our
folly, but whose distorted natures will be living proofs of our
incapacity, of our impotence as educators, when the experiment tried for
the thousand and first time fails yet again, as it always has done, and
always will do to the world's end, while Human Nature remains the same.

Let us then take a few examples, which are not intended to stand the
test of severe criticism, but which are only used as illustrations of
the idea which we are now considering.

Let us then first suppose that the devotional element in man acts alone.
The experiment has already been tried. Many a hermit in lonely cell or
rocky cavern, has cut himself off from the society of men, from action,
duty and love, in order that he may be devout without hindrance. How
many such men have poured out their souls upon the ground, on barren
sand or desert rock, souls which might have watered thousands with the
dew of heaven, and all because they made one fatal life-mistake;--they
thought, that to pray always meant to be always saying prayers.

Who could be more devout than Saint Simeon Stylites? who spent all his
life upon the top of a tall pillar, absorbed in contemplation, ecstasy,
remorse and prayer. Let the poet speak for him.

  "Bethink thee, Lord? while Thou and all the saints
  Enjoy themselves in heaven, and men on earth
  House in the shade of comfortable roofs,
  Sit with their wives by fires, eat wholesome food
  And wear warm clothes, and even beasts have stalls,
  I, 'twixt the spring and downfal of the light
  Bow down one thousand and two hundred times
  To Christ, the Virgin Mother and the Saints:
  Or in the night, after a little sleep,
  I wake, the chill stars sparkle; I am wet
  With drenching dews, or stiff with crackling frost,
  I wear an undressed goatskin on my neck,
  And in my weak, lean arms I lift the Cross,
  And strive and wrestle with Thee till I die.
  O mercy, mercy, wash away my sin!"

A mournful spectacle. Devotion excited to madness, while mind, heart,
and conscience, all are dumb, and the poor weak body only bears the
heavy burdens which the tyrannous soul heaps upon it!

Devotion, then, needs _conscience_. Conscience tells a man that he must
act as well as pray. Devotion makes the great act of prayer. Conscience
works out into the actual of every-day life, the ideal of which devotion
has conceived. Will then devotion and conscience be sufficient for a
noble manhood? Devotion and conscience alone developed, have ofttimes,
in the days that are past, formed some stern old grand inquisitor,
torturing the life out of human sinews because he ought. The grand
inquisitor's devotion and conscience told him that he ought to advance
the holy faith by every engine in his power, and therefore, as he
considered that the rack, the thumbscrews, the rope, the fire and the
faggot were the best possible engines, he used the same to the utmost of
his ability; and thought, alas for humanity! that he was doing God
service.

The grand inquisitor had devotion, he had conscience, he probably
also had nerves of iron; but he could not possibly have had a
_heart_. Devotion, then, and conscience need a loving, human heart. Will
these three be sufficient? The picture grows fairer, we begin to feel
less pain when we turn away from the stern, dark portrait of the grand
inquisitor, which frowns so grimly in the picture gallery of history,
and look upon that fair and gentle upturned face, half shaded by the
veil that covers her head. That is a nun of the order of Saint Theresa.

The pale, emaciated countenance tells of many a vigil protracted through
the long hours of the night; those wild eyes once saw, or thought they
saw, the picture of the Virgin hanging in her cell smiling on her as she
prayed; yea, and have wept many a tear as she repeated her sins over to
her confessor, or as she stood by the bed-side of some poor sufferer,
while those gentle Christian hands smoothed the dying pillow. Rest in
peace, soul sainted and dear! The tears thou didst once shed, are wiped
away now forever; the sins thou didst once bewail, are all forgiven now,
for thou hast loved much!

But the day of nuns has gone forever. A higher development must be
sought for. The nun becomes impossible when we train the _intellect_;
Devotion says, Worship; the Mind adds, The Lord thy God. The Conscience
says, Do right; the Intellect shows what is right. The Heart says, Love
thy fellow-men; the Intellect tells the right way of loving them. Piety
and charity! these are glorious! these are the two angels from Heaven
which prompt us to help our brothers who need our help; but intellect
must show us the way to do it. To take a single instance. Piety and
charity cannot show us how to drain and ventilate and rebuild the hovels
of the poor in New York. No, every spade, every saw, every hammer
employed in that most righteous undertaking must be directed by
intellect, by science. Piety and charity may prompt, but intellect must
guide.

I know full well that many a woman's heart, guided only by her sacred
instinct of loving, acts out the law of right without any conscious
questioning of the intellect; that a thousand tender feet carry the
gospel of Christ along the alleys of New York and London, or along the
corridors of the Crimean hospital, though even there also woman's wit
has to aid woman's heart. The noble heart, the Christian love of
Florence Nightingale took her to those eastern shores; this made the
voice tender and the hand gentle. But whoso reads the account of what
she did, will see that beside these, wit and wisdom, keen discerning of
means to ends, ability to see what ought to be done, intellect, reason
in short, was necessary in order to make a Florence Nightingale
possible, together with an exhaustless fund of bodily endurance,
fortitude and stoicism.

Thus, then, we find that devotion, conscience, heart, and intellect are
all necessary to each other in the harmonious development of Human
Nature. Will they be found sufficient for a perfect life?

Put together a strong soul, a tender conscience, a woman's heart, and a
man's intellect, and we have a Charlotte Bronte,--surely one of the best
types of the modern mind. Will she find these four noble parts of Human
Nature sufficient for the task of living?

Let Charlotte Bronte answer, walking painfully across the moor with hand
held hard to beating side, sitting now and then upon a stone to keep
herself from falling, wondering why the daylight blinds her so, obliged
to give up Villette owing to the terrible headaches which it brings on.
Let Charlotte Bronte answer, dying before her time at thirty-nine years
of age, when the path of fame was just beginning to be bright before
her, and the world was just beginning to know how much it wanted her.
Charlotte Bronte, the gifted and the feeble, the lynx-eyed and the
blind, so full of glorious strength and pitiable weakness! Charlotte
Bronte, who feels the pressure of every-day life to be as hard as a
giant's grasp upon her throat! Charlotte Bronte cannot tell why she is
so unhappy, why she feels like a prisoner in the world,--why earth, our
beautiful earth, is like a charnel house to her. And yet we think that
the most ordinary passerby could see very satisfactory reasons why
Charlotte Bronte was what she was, and felt what she felt. Hollow cheek
and faded eye, teach their wisdom to their possessor last of all. The
pale-eyed school-girl, who never played along with the other children,
never ran and laughed and shouted with the rest, little knew what days
and hours and years of dulness, of pain and agony, she was laying up for
the future, what a premature grave she was digging for herself. Peace be
with her, her toil is over; it is now three years since Heaven received
in Charlotte Bronte one angel more.

Intellect, then, needs _body_. Come, then, and see me build a Man! A
calm, silent devotion, a conscience pure and reverent, a heart manful
and true, an intellect clear and keen, a frame of iron,--with these will
we dower our hero, and call him Washington!

From me Washington needs no eulogy. Free America is at once his eulogy
and his monument! It is useless to say more. Every one here feels in his
heart a higher praise than can be uttered by the tongue. But let me ask
you, What would Washington's qualities of mind and heart have availed
his country, unless the manly strength, the frame of iron had been
added? A good man he might have been, a patriot he surely would have
been; but the Father of his Country, never! The soul that trusted in
God, the conscience that felt the omnipotence of justice and right, the
heart that beat for his country's weal alone, the mind that thought out
her freedom, was upborne by the body that knew no fatigue, by the nerves
that knew not how to tremble.

Washington had to endure physical fatigue enough to have killed three
ordinary men. And how well did his youth prepare him for a
life of protracted toil. Hear his biographer Irving. "He was a
self-disciplinarian in physical as well as mental matters, and practised
himself in all kinds of athletic exercises, such as running, leaping,
pitching quoits, and tossing bars. His frame even in infancy had been
large and powerful, and he now excelled most of his playmates in
contests of agility and strength. As a proof of his muscular power, a
place is still pointed out at Fredericksburg, near the lower ferry,
where, when a boy, he threw a stone across the river. In horsemanship,
too, he already excelled, and was ready to back, and able to manage, the
most fiery steed. Traditional anecdotes still remain of his achievements
in this respect."

Some of you have doubtless seen in Thackeray's 'Virginians,' that young
Warrington found that he was more than a match for the English jumpers,
as indeed, writes he, he ought to be, as he could jump twenty-one feet
and a half, and no one in Virginia could beat him, except Colonel G.
Washington.

It is needless to say that I do not mean to exalt the body at the
expense of the higher faculties. I only maintain that the rest are
incomplete without the physical element; in which indeed all the other
powers dwell, and by means of which they are more or less clearly
manifested. There may, of course, be vast physical energy without any
corresponding development of mind or soul, as any blacksmith or prize
fighter could tell us. And further, there may be a character, in which
some of the higher qualities may exist in great perfection, coupled,
too, with mighty force of body, and yet the character may be incomplete.
Take, as an instance, another of America's great men.

Daniel Webster! perhaps the most cavernous head, set upon the strongest
shoulders, which has appeared upon the planet, since the soul of
Socrates went back to God. Daniel Webster! strong mind in strong body,
leader and king of men, deep-chested, lion-voiced, whose words of power
moved men as the wind moves the sea, whose eloquence had a physical
energy, a bodily grandeur about it like to that of no other man. Daniel
Webster! pride of all Americans; to you I leave it to say where he was
weak. It belongs not to me, a stranger, to pluck one laurel from that
stately brow; his own brethren must do it, with reluctant and half
remorseful hands, pitying the errors which marred so grand a character,
but saying of him as I would say of England, Webster, with all thy
faults, I love thee still.

Our analysis of human character, necessarily one-sided and imperfect, is
now ended. It remains for us to ask, What are its bearings upon American
education? How far does American education fulfil the wants of Human
Nature, and wherein does it disregard them? The title of my Lecture
tells plainly enough, where I think that the great deficiency is found;
a deficiency which reacts upon both mind and morals, and ofttimes
utterly defeats the best efforts of clergymen and teachers. I assert,
then, that, in America, the body is almost entirely neglected. Thirty
thousand clergymen, from as many pulpits, advocate the claims of the
conscience and the soul. A hundred thousand teachers are busied
throughout the length and breadth of the land in training the intellect,
while a man could almost count on his fingers the number of those
engaged in training the body. The intellectual training which the masses
receive, is the highest glory of American education. If I wanted a
stranger to believe that the Millennium was not far off, I would take
him to some of those grand Ward Schools in New York, where able heads
are trained by the thousand. When I myself entered them, I was literally
astonished. When I looked at the teachers who instructed that throng of
young souls, I could not help saying to myself, Ah! dear friends, it
would do you good to know what I feel just now. I can feel the very
blessing of God descending on your labors, just as if I could see it
with mine eyes. What piety have been at work here, in the construction
of this colossal system of education! What inspired energy was needed to
work it out! What charity is necessary to carry it on! Many a teacher
saw I there, unknown, may-be, to all the world, carrying on her work
with noble zeal and earnestness, to whom the quick young brains around
bore abundant testimony. When I saw them, I blessed them in my heart, I
magnified mine office, and said to myself, I, too, am a teacher.

I spent four or five days doing little else than going through these
truly wonderful schools. I stayed more than three hours in one of them,
wondering at all I saw, admiring the stately order, the unbroken
discipline of the whole arrangements, and the wonderful quickness and
intelligence of the scholars. That same evening I went to see a friend,
whose daughter, a child of thirteen, was at one of the ward schools. I
examined her in algebra, and found that the little girl of thirteen
could hold her own with many of a larger growth. Did she go to school
to-day? asked I. No, was the answer, she has not been for some time, as
she was beginning to get quite a serious curvature of the spine, so now
she goes regularly to a gymnastic doctor. I almost feel ashamed to
criticize such noble institutions as the schools of New York; but truth
compels me to do this. Hitherto, nothing whatever has been done to train
the bodies of the tens of thousands who are educated there. All that is
done is excellent, is wonderful, but fearful drawbacks come into play,
in the shape of physical weakness, and positive male-formation of body.

The only remedy which can be devised, I think, in a crowded city like
New York, where it is impossible to get open ground, is to have large
gymnasiums attached to every ward school, and daily exercise therein
should form an essential part of the education there. The importance of
this to New York cannot be estimated, and I heard with joy, that a
gymnasium was established in at least one of the ward schools, and I
found out that the teachers of others were alive to this most crying
need. I read too, with very great pleasure, that a Mr. Sedgwick of New
York was appointed to deliver a lecture on the importance of physical
education, at the next meeting of the Teachers Association, in that
State; and indeed every one begins to feel that something must be done,
and that quickly. Miss Beecher's book enlightened most people on this
subject, and reform is already inaugurated. It is well that it is so, or
the race would dwindle away before our very eyes. Listen to some
serio-comic verse upon this subject, taken out of your Lecturer's
portfolio. It is an address to America, dictated by an ancient sage:--

  'Oh! latest born of time, the wise man said,
  A mighty destiny surrounds thy head;
  Great is thy mission, but the puny son
  Lacks strength to finish what the sires begun;
  Thy hapless daughters breathe the poison'd air,
  Fair they may be, but fragile more than fair;
  They know not, doom'd ones, that the air of heaven,
  For breathing purposes to man was given;
  They know not half the things which life requires,
  But melt their lives away where stoves and fires,
  And furnace issuing from the realms beneath,
  Distils through parlor floors its poisonous breath.
  Sooner or later must the slighted air
  And exercise take vengeance on the fair.
  Ah! one by one I see them fade and fall,
  Both old and young, fair, dark or short or tall,
  Till one stupendous ruin wraps them all.'

One can sometimes, in a smiling way, give utterance to truths which seem
hard and stern when spoken in grim earnest. Let us see whether we cannot
find some allegory to represent what we mean.

Some time ago, I read a tale which related that a certain gentleman was,
once on a time, digging a deep hole in his garden. He had, as I myself
had in my younger days, a perfect passion for digging holes, for the
mere pleasure of doing it; but the hole which he was now digging was by
far the deepest which he had ever attempted. At last he became perfectly
fascinated, carried away by his pursuit, and actually had his dinner let
down to him by a bucket. Well, he dug on late and early, when just as he
was plunging in his spade with great energy for a new dig, he penetrated
right through, and fell down, down to the centre of the earth.

To his astonishment he landed upon the top of a coach which was passing
at the time, and soon found himself perfectly at home, and began to
enter into conversation with the passenger opposite to him, a very
gentlemanly looking man enveloped entirely in a black cloak. He soon
found out that the country into which his lot had fallen was a very
strange one. Its peculiarities were thus stated by his gentlemanly
fellow-passenger. "Ours, Sir," said he, "is called the country of
Skitzland. All the Skitzlanders are born with all their limbs and
features perfect; but when they arrive at a certain age, all their limbs
and features which have not been used drop off, leaving only the bones
behind. It is rather dark this evening, or you would have seen this more
plainly. Look forward there at our coachman, he consists simply of a
stomach and hands, these being the only things he has ever used. Those
two whom you see chatting together are brothers in misfortune; one is a
clergyman, the other a lawyer; they have neither of them got any legs at
all, though each of them possess a finely developed understanding; and
you cannot help remarking what a massive jaw the lawyer has got. Yonder
is Mr.----, the celebrated millionaire, he is just raising his hat; you
see he has lost all the top part of his head, indeed he has little of
his head left, except the bump of acquisitiveness and the faculty of
arithmetical calculation. There are two ladies, members of the
fashionable world, their case is very pitiable, they consist of nothing
whatever but a pair of eyes and a bundle of nerves. There are two
members of the mercantile world, they are munching some sandwiches, you
see, but it is merely for the sake of keeping up appearances; as I can
assure you, from my own personal knowledge, that they have no digestive
organs whatever. As for myself, I am a schoolmaster. I have been a hard
student all my life, at school and at college, and moreover I have had a
natural sympathy with my fellow-men, and so I am blessed with a brain
and heart entire. But see here." And he lifted up his cloak, and lo!
underneath, a skeleton, save just here! "See, here are the limbs I never
used, and therefore they have deserted me. All the solace I now have
consists in teaching the young children to avoid a similar doom. I
sometimes show them what I have shown you. I labor hard to convince them
that most assuredly the same misfortune will befall them which has
happened to me and to all the grown-up inhabitants; but even then, I
grieve to say, I cannot always succeed. Many believe that they will be
lucky enough to escape, and some of the grown-up inhabitants pad
themselves, and so cheat the poor children into the belief that they are
all right, though all the elder ones know better. You will now perceive
the reason why all the gentlemen you see wear such tight pantaloons,
they pretend that it is fashionable, but in reality it is in order to
prevent their false legs from tumbling out. Surely my case is miserable
enough; my only hope consists in the idea of educating the rising
generation to do better. No doubt it is easy to persuade them to do so
in the country from which you come, but I assure you," added he with a
heartfelt sigh, "that it is sometimes very hard to do so here. Nearly
all of us, then, have lost something of our bodies. Some have no head,
some no legs, some no heart, and so on; the less a man has lost, the
higher he ranks in the social scale; and our Aristocracy, the governing
body, consists of the few individuals who have used all their faculties,
and therefore now possess them all."

At this moment a dreadful earthquake broke out, and an extempore volcano
shot the gentleman who had listened to this interesting, narration right
up to the crust of the earth again, and by a strange and fortunate
chance shot him up into the very hole which he had been digging, and he
discovered himself lying down at the bottom of the hole, feeling just as
if he had awakened from a dream; and to his surprise, heard distinctly
the voice of his wife crying out from the top, "Come, come, dear, you're
very late, and supper is getting quite cold!"

The name of the country of Skitzland translated into the vulgar tongue
is the planet earth, and America is one of the portions thereof. If we
were to look round in a circuit of a hundred miles, how many of the
Skitzland aristocracy should we find, think you? What a dropping off of
limbs and features there would be, if the letter of the law of Skitzland
were carried out! But it is absolutely certain that, this is in effect
the law of nature, which does not act, it is true, all in a moment; but
which slowly and truly tends to this. The Hindoo ties up an arm, for
years together, as a penance, thinking thereby he does Brahma service;
the limb with fatal sureness withers away, and rots. The prisoner in
solitary confinement has his mind and faculties bound, fettered and
tied, and by a law as fixed as that which keeps the stars in their
places, the said prisoner's mind grows weaker, feebler, less sane, day
by day. School children are confined six long hours in a close
school-room, sitting in one unvarying posture, their lungs breathing
corrupted air, no single limb moving as it ought to move, not the
faintest shadow of attention being paid to heart, lungs, digestive
organs, legs or arms, all these being bound down, and tied as it were;
and so, by the stern edict of heaven, which, when man was placed upon
earth, decreed that the faculties unused should weaken and fail, we see
around us thousands of unhealthy children whose brains are developed at
the expense of their bodies; the ultimate consequence of which will be,
deterioration of brain as well as body.

What is the remedy for all this? I have before stated that in large
crowded cities, gymnastic training, systematically pursued _as a study_,
is the only thing which seems possible to be done, and most assuredly
will be beneficial wherever it is introduced. But there is a different
method of physical education, which can be pursued either exclusively,
or in association with gymnastics, which can be followed up either in
the country, or in towns, where playgrounds can be obtained. This is the
method which I have invariably pursued myself, namely, the systematic
pursuit of health and strength by all manner of manly sports and games.
I myself learnt to play and love these games at school and at college. I
have given them now nearly four years' trial in my school, and every day
convinces me more and more of their beneficial results.

I cannot tell how much physical weakness, how much moral evil we have
batted, and bowled, and shinnied away from our door; but I do know that
we have batted and bowled away indolence, and listlessness, and doing
nothing, which I believe is the Devil's greatest engine; and I also know
that the enthusiasm of the boys in these games never dies out, their
enjoyment never flags, for these games supply the want of the boys'
natures, and keep their thoughts from straying to forbidden ground.

Now these games are the very thing which that portion of mankind called
the sporting world, have always loved and cherished. They have infused
the love of these games into the very bones of Englishmen, and who knows
how much good England owes to them! Let us then overlook for a while the
religious world, the commercial world, the literary world, for they do
not contain what we seek now, and let us look at this poor sister world,
a world which seldom finds itself in such good company.

Each of these worlds has its work; the one we now have to do with, the
sporting world, is a world probably as much decried, and with as much
reason, as any. But see how pertinaciously this world will persist in
coming up to the surface wherever a community of men may be. See how
rigorously the Puritans tried to put down, or rather _squeeze_ this
heinous tendency out of Human Nature! But they did not succeed, though
goodness knows, they tried hard enough. Yet it has come up again, and
lo! it is now as vigorous as ever. Friends! I am finding fault with the
Puritans in the very midst of their descendants. But what greater
compliment could I pay these old Puritans than this? for their greatest
glory is, that they left to their descendants the precious legacy of
free thought! and so deeply imbedded is this in the very bones of the
race, that they will gladly hear a stranger criticize and even condemn,
a portion of the Puritan mind: knowing full well, that the fabric which
they builded on the shores of this Continent is sufficient to bear
witness to the real manhood that was in them. But what was the reason of
their failure? Simply they were trying to drive out Nature with a
pitchfork, and she of course will perpetually keep coming back. So we
say of this world, the sporting world, so liable to abuse, and so
unsparingly abused, what is true of all the worlds, and that is, that it
would be well for mankind, if they were to bestow a little thought upon
the demands of this, as well as of the other worlds; and not be content
to ignore wholly a thing the value of which they do not understand;--how
the sporting world has witnessed, does witness, and will forever
witness, for a fact in Human Nature, which no amount of pressure will
ever squeeze out of Human Nature, and that is, the necessity which human
beings feel for amusement, and for open air exercise, not exercise
merely, but hearty, joyous, blood-stirring exercise, with a good amount
of pleasant emulation in it.

This, then, is what cricket and boating, battledore and archery, shinney
and skating, fishing, hunting, shooting, and baseball mean, namely, that
there is a joyous spontaneity in human beings; and thus Nature, by means
of the sporting world, by means of a great number of very imperfect,
undignified, and sometimes quite disreputable mouthpieces, is
perpetually striving to say something deserving of far nobler and
clearer utterance; something which statesmen, lawgivers, preachers, and
educators would do well to lay to heart. My children, she would say, are
not intended to be made working machines; they have capacities for joy,
for spontaneous action, for doing some pleasant thing for the mere sake
of doing it, without any regard to gain or profit, whether it be of
money or anything else; and by obeying my dictates, they will find
riches which they never sought for, will obtain gifts they never asked.

Why, a fast young man at an English University too often learns no good
thing there, except to play a capital game at cricket, have a good seat
upon a horse, pull an oar till he drops, and to have a general belief in
the omnipotence of pluck! And I can tell you that is no bad education
too, as far as it goes. I am perfectly well aware that fast young men
too often learn other and worse things than these, learn to drink, and
swear, and debauch, and to spend as fast as possible in riotous living
the manhood and strength which God has given them. But this I know and
publicly declare, that it is this love of manly sports which keeps the
fast young men of England from utter corruption and decay. Such men,
renowned in their school and college days as good cricketers, oarsmen or
riders, were the men that made Alma, Inkermann, and Balaklava possible;
who have just done battle at fearful odds on the burning plains of
India, on behalf of helpless women and slaughtered babies; and those
whom their strong right arm could not save, it was able to avenge! The
iron endurance which they had gained in many a bloodless contest, stood
them in good stead there, when all their manhood was needed, if ever it
was; and over those that nobly died there, methinks that I can see the
Genius of England weep bitter tears, and thus speak with deep
self-reproach:--"Ah! sons of mine! loved and early lost! ye whom I could
not teach, whom no one in all my broad lands could teach, how to unite
the virtuous, wise and holy soul, together with the soul joyous and
free! Alas! for me, that ye had to die, before I could know how noble ye
were! that your cold bodies, fallen on the field, wounds all in front,
and none behind, would be so many poor dumb mouths to tell me of the
untold wealth which I have in my children, those very ones who too often
are nought but shame and grief to me!" Dear, noble old England! if God
will teach her this wisdom, her old heart will beat on bravely for a
thousand years to come.

The preponderance of the animal, the bodily element, produces fast young
men; and fast young men, and boys tending to become such, are the
problem of society, the terror of the peace-loving, money-making world,
and the scandal of the Educator, as he himself feels well enough his own
impotence in dealing with them.

I have seen many an Educator who has felt that he ought to get at these
young rebellious forces, but who does not know the way, and despairingly
wonders why he cannot do so. Friend! I would say, no man can influence
another, unless he has something akin to Him. What do you think gives
these blacklegs, men of not a tithe of your force and talent, such power
over them? Why, it is community of nature, interests in common. But what
interests have you in common with a fast young man? You know nothing
that he knows, you admire nothing that he admires; and until you do
really get a community of interest with him, you will be wide asunder as
the poles, and the fast young man will remain, as he has hitherto
remained, the one disgraceful problem which modern education cannot
solve.

If an educator or college tutor wishes to influence this class of his
scholars, or if a clergyman wishes to gain the souls of this part of his
congregation, the one most difficult to deal with, let him join with
them in some manly game, and let him assuredly know that whatever true
manhood he has will stand him in good stead, and nothing else: nothing
but real vital religion, real nobleness of character will be of any use
in the cricket-field or the row-boat; and this will hold its own here as
well as elsewhere.

Once, then, establish a community of interest on any one subject with
young men, and you open to yourself a door, by which all good may enter.
Nature, dear friends, makes nothing in vain, and it is of such infinite
importance that strength of limb, readiness of eye and hand, physical
vigor in short, should be transmitted from generation to generation,
that she keeps producing fast young men, in spite of the thousand
excesses which they commit, and will do so, until the ablest and wisest
human minds take the matter in hand, and see to it that this part of
Human Nature has its proper and legitimate food, guided by mind,
thought, and reverence, instead of being allowed to run riot in all
manner of wantonness.

The sporting world, then, with its manly games and manly sports, gives
us the means which are needed by the community at large for physical
education; and the future educators of the country must be taught to
love these manly games at school and at college, and then they will be
able to disseminate them; whereas, at present, educators in this country
are almost entirely ignorant of any manly games whatever. "But are not
these games very dangerous," asks a careful mamma; "don't you find that
boys get hurt very much by them? I have heard of some one who got his
teeth knocked down his throat by them. Somebody else got his head hurt
at shinney and so that was put a stop to, I believe, at Mr.----'s
school." Such mammas, doubtless, put into the hands of their children
some good little book, with a narration of this sort. Little Johnny was
told by his mamma not to climb trees. He was a good boy, and generally
obedient. But one day he was in the garden of one of his schoolfellows,
who asked him to climb a cherry tree; he forgot his mother's command,
and went up, but after he had climbed nearly to the top his foot
slipped, and down he tumbled through the branches on to the ground. He
cried very much, and could not move, so they had to put him upon a
shutter and carry him home. The doctor found that his leg was broken;
the pain was dreadful when he had it set, &c. &c.; the drama ending by
Johnny throwing his arms round his mother's neck, and declaring that if
he ever got well, he would never disobey his dear, dear mother any more!

The good people who write these edifying stories never seem to think
whether it was wise for mamma to forbid Johnny to climb a tree. Monkeys
are never forbidden to do so, and I seldom hear anything of their
falling off. Poor people's children climb trees, and there does not seem
to be an extraordinary increase of juvenile mortality on this account.
What should you say if some hard-hearted person, myself for instance,
were to say to the dear mother of little Johnny, "Dear Madam, you
yourself, I grieve to say, were the cause of Johnny's accident; you have
habitually prevented him from doing anything which would quicken his
perceptions and strengthen his limbs. He must not soil his pinafore, he
must not get his hands dirty, and above all he must not play at any
games which make his hair untidy, or tear his clothes. In fact, you have
forbidden him to do precisely those things which Nature prompted him to
do. He has generally been very obedient, you say, and therefore his
bodily powers have become weaker instead of stronger. Well, the
temptation came, the unused and untrustworthy limbs were summoned to
act, his consciousness of doing wrong enfeebled him still further, and
made them still more nervous. He went up the tree, and the natural
consequence was, that he fell."

This, in substance, is the answer to all questions of this class. I have
played at cricket or shinney, or boated, since I was nine years old.
During the last three years and a half, I have played at one or the
other almost every day. I have played at shinney, or hockey, as we call
it, all through the winter, through snow a foot deep, and when the
thermometer was below zero; I have played at cricket in summer with the
thermometer at 90, and I have never yet seen one serious accident. The
fact is, that I have a theory that Nature loves young men and boys, and
love to aid them in their sports. She sends her ice and snow to educate
them and make them hardy, while we are sitting by the stove and abusing
the weather. She won't let them be hurt half as much by a blow or a
fall, as older people who do not love her half as well. She breaks the
young one's fall, and herself puts the plaster on his little fingers.
She is delighted at every conquest that these young children of hers
make over herself, just like some big boxer she stands, who is teaching
his boy to box. He feints and threatens and looks big, but who so
pleased as he when the young one gets in his one two!

Again, the danger is little or nothing to the daring and courageous. The
fellow that isn't afraid of the ball, is scarcely ever hurt. He defends
himself with eye and hand. The coward is the one most likely to get
hurt. I think that there is just enough risk in these games to engender
a manly contempt for pain, and a bold handling of a danger. If the
cricket ball were a soft affair, it would be a game for babies not boys.

Let us then take a hint from the sporting world, and turn to the use of
the many that which has formed the only redeeming feature of a few. The
good that these manly games do, should not be confined to a small class,
but should be diffused among the whole community, for the sporting world
has something to say to all of us. It rouses the scholar from his desk,
shakes him, and tells him that much study is a weariness to the flesh,
and that the fields are alive with song. Out then he must come, and
leave his musty books.

It comes to the business man in the crowded city, and babbles of green
fields, nudges Mr. Sparrowgrass with its elbow, and tells him to take
Mrs. S. and the children into the country.

It comes to Mr. Fezziwig at Christmas time, and tells him to let the
young men in his shop have a jolly time of it, put by their work, listen
to the fiddle, and join the dance.

Ay, and the dream of those half-forgotten days comes over Scrooge, the
miserly, miserable Scrooge, and wakes up something like a soul in him.

It comes to Colonel Newcome, and bids him go to Charter House School,
and take his boy out for a holiday.

This same spirit came to the ancient Greek in drama, dance and game, and
with him was set to music, and consecrated to the gods, to Apollo the
ever young, to Pallas the wise, to Bacchus the joy-giver.

It came to the stern old Roman with his Saturnalia, when for once in all
the year the slave and the plebeian might speak their minds without
fear.

It came to the dark-eyed Hebrew with his feasts of tabernacles, his
feast of the harvest and the vintage, and over his joyaunce a sacred
shadow rested, as of One who was over these things, who both made and
consecrated the joy.

Spirit of joy! Wide as the world! Offspring of heaven! That descendest
with airs redolent of thy native home, and comest to give to the
toil-worn brickmakers of the earth a little rest! Forgive us, foolish
dwellers in the clay, if ofttimes we take thy festal garlands, and drag
them in the mire! drunk with the wine of thy pleasures, we turn thy
gifts to ashes and to mourning. Come thou, nevertheless! and stay not,
turn not away for our folly, come with thy love-light, and smile-light,
and make the whole earth green with thy summer of delight.

It were a theme worthy of the place and time, if we could sketch out the
progress of mankind; to show how God laid the foundations of the human
race in the barbaric ages, strong, savage human bodies being the stones
thereof; how in due order, order as sure and stately as that of the
geologic eras, arose the Roman and the Greek, the types of full
developed body and mind together: how in the fullness of time
Christianity revealed the mighty powers of heart, conscience and soul,
which before were lying dormant in the human race; so that now at last
upon us has fallen the task of developing the whole of man,--body, mind,
heart, conscience and soul.

But my time, if not your patience, fails me: so I leave it as a hint for
future thought, and will in conclusion utter a few words of courage and
hope for mankind, which each event of to-day seems to strengthen and
enlarge. Yes, it is no longer fitting, that for the future we should
have few hopers and many fearers. Nay, rather let us all join hands
to-day, and form a great Electric Cable of Hope, that shall stretch from
sea to sea, from shore to shore.

For it is certain, then, that the planet upon which God has placed us,
is absolutely well fitted for the development of the human race. The
more Science investigates, the more wonderful seems the adaptation of
Human Nature to the world in which it is placed. The more refined a man
becomes, the more delicate his insight into Nature, the more satisfied,
the more overjoyed is he with her exhaustless charms. It is only our
sin, our folly, our ignorance, which perpetually befools us, and robs us
of our inheritance.

When the great coming race, prophesied of so long, shall at last inhabit
the earth, they shall see no more glorious stars, no bluer atmosphere,
than we do to-day; the moon shall pour forth no more silver from her
bounteous horn; the sun shall lavish his golden rays no more freely,
than he does to-day. But yet the whole world shall be unimaginably
brighter and more beautiful to that crowning race. And why? Because
their natures shall be in tune with the outward universe; their eyes and
ears, and all their senses, shall be unimaginably more acute than ours;
their bodies shall be perpetual sources of joy to them, and their souls
shall be awake to knowledge, truth and love.

If our eyes were endowed with magnifying powers equal to that of some
colossal telescope, how would the dome of heaven expand into
inconceivable dimensions, the stars would be seen to be scattered along
the sky like the sands upon the sea-shore. Each bright particular star
would be magnified a thousand times, seeming vastly larger, and yet
vastly more distant. The whole concave of heaven then would appear a
thousand times larger than it does to our eyes, that is, it would appear
a thousand times over more like its real size, though even then, eyes
thus grandly gifted would fall immeasurably short of the reality of the
universe which lies in the bosom of God! Now that great race of the
future shall have their nature so in tune with things, and their
spiritual conceptions so enlarged, that the great world shall be
realized in its vastness, so much more vividly than we can conceive of
it, that it shall be as if their material eye were exalted to the power
of Lord Rosse's telescope.

Put together the fragments of men that we have amongst us to-day,--the
physical joy in existence of the western hunter, the intellectual
keenness of the man of science, the love of Nature of the artist or
poet, the love for each little bird and insect of the naturalist, the
justice of a Washington, the love for God and man of a Florence
Nightingale, and then we gain some glimpses of the men of the future
whom God has willed shall possess the planet at last. For assuredly the
race is safe, though nations or individuals may fail and perish. Safe,
because God has not built the planet in vain; safe, because his long
patience shall have its full satisfaction at the last. How shall these
things be? God will give this blessing to human labor directed by truth
and love.

From partial and one-sided cultivation of Human Nature, partial and
one-sided results can alone ensue. The commencement of this glorious era
will date from the first complete education of all the manifold nature
of man. The grand work once inaugurated, by the wondrous law of
hereditary descent, natures completer and nobler on all sides will be
the heritage of the next generation, by virtue of their birth, and so on
in stately progression each generation shall expand and transmit a
larger power to the generation that succeeds it; and at last the grand
universe of matter shall put the world of man to shame no longer, but
man with God's image shining through him, shall be seen to be worthy of
the glorious nature in whose bosom he dwells.

See to it then, Educators! that young Human Nature has its due. See to
it that conscience and the soul have their rightful supremacy, that
intellect and sweet human affection walk hand in hand. And lastly, see
to it, Educators! that these young bodies have their due. Learn for
yourselves numberless manly sports and games, and resolutely continue to
teach them and practise them yourselves in the midst of your scholars.
Love open air and exercise yourselves first; this love will be
contagious, and will communicate itself to those around you. No atom of
true dignity will be lost, and a priceless fund of good humor will be
gained for yourself, and a mutual good feeling will be established
forever between you and your scholars. Do this, and we shall no longer
hear of schoolmasters becoming old men before they are forty; but the
schoolmaster will be known as the youngest looking, healthiest and
happiest man in the district.

Upon us, my friends, more than upon any other class of men, this great,
this lamentably neglected duty devolves. We are to see to it that young
limbs and lungs have their rights; we must make men understand that it
will be a sin against God, if they do not have their rights; a sin,
whose punishment is as certain as the law of gravitation. And more, it
must be our task to make men understand the inevitable blessing which is
sure to descend upon the keeping of God's commandments written upon the
body.

Schoolmaster in country village! whose two dollars per diem are
begrudged and shaved down by some committee of boobies! whose lot,
may-be, is additionally blessed by the privilege of boarding out among
the exceedingly willing inhabitants of the district! upon thee no
foolish word of pity shall fall from lips of mine! Thee no wise man will
pity, but rather bid thee be of good cheer and play the man! Witness
thou, in thy little corner of the great world, for all Human Nature. See
thou that each part has its due, in the little flock of which thou art
shepherd. Be faithful to thy sacred trust, and eyes yet unborn shall
shine with the truth-light which thou didst first impart. Yea,
generations shall rise up and call thee blessed! By thee the young
nerves, and limbs, and brain shall be loved, and pitied, and understood.
Thou, like another Greatheart, shalt shield them from ignorance and
wrong. To thee no word of man can matter much. Whether thou be praised
or despised of men, is to thee a small thing; for in the calm eventide,
when the day's work is over, thou hast ears to listen to the Master's
voice, saying to his servant, Well done!





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Lecture on Physical Development, and
its Relations to Mental and Spiritual Development, delivered before the American Institute of Instruction, at their Twenty-Ninth Annual Meeting, in Norwich, Conn., August 20, 1858, by S.R. Calthrop

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A LECTURE ON PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT ***

***** This file should be named 12430.txt or 12430.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/2/4/3/12430/

Produced by Curtis Weyant, Kelsey Innis and PG Distributed Proofreaders

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


