The Project Gutenberg eBook, Report of Mr. W. E. Cormack's journey in
search of the Red Indians in Newfoundland, by W. E. Cormack


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: Report of Mr. W. E. Cormack's journey in search of the Red Indians
in Newfoundland

Author: W. E. Cormack

Release Date: October 16, 2004  [eBook #13762]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REPORT OF MR. W. E. CORMACK'S
JOURNEY IN SEARCH OF THE RED INDIANS IN NEWFOUNDLAND***


E-text prepared by Canadian Insitute for Historical Microreproduction,
Wallace McLean, and the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading
Team



REPORT OF MR W. E. CORMACK'S JOURNEY IN SEARCH OF THE RED INDIANS
IN NEWFOUNDLAND

Read before the Boeothick Institution at St John's, Newfoundland







Pursuant to special summons, a meeting of this Institution was held at
St John's on the 12th day of January 1828; the Honourable A.W.
Desbarres, Vice-Patron, in the chair. The Honourable Chairman stated,
that the primary motive which led to the formation of the Institution,
was the desire of opening a communication with, and promoting the
civilization of, the Red Indians of Newfoundland; and of procuring, if
possible, an authentic history of that unhappy race of people, in
order that their language, customs and pursuits, might be contrasted
with those of other tribes of Indians and nations;--that, in following
up the chief object of the institution, it was anticipated that much
information would be obtained respecting the natural productions of
the island; the interior of which is less known than any other of the
British possessions abroad. Their excellent President, keeping all
these objects in view, had permitted nothing worthy of research to
escape his scrutiny, and consequently a very wide field of information
was now introduced to their notice, all apparently highly interesting
and useful to society, if properly cultivated. He was aware of their
very natural anxiety to hear from the president an outline of his
recent expedition, and he would occupy their attention farther, only
by observing, that the purposes of the present meeting would be best
accomplished by taking into consideration the different subjects
recommended to them in the president's report, and passing such
resolutions as might be considered necessary to govern the future
proceedings of the Institution.

The President, W.E. Cormack, Esq. then laid the following Statement
before the meeting.

Having so recently returned, I will now only lay before you a brief
outline of my expedition in search of the Boeothicks or Red Indians,
confining my remarks exclusively to its primary object. A detailed
report of the journey will be prepared, and submitted to the
Institution, whenever I shall have leisure to arrange the other
interesting materials which have been collected.

My party consisted of three Indians, whom I procured from among the
other different tribes, viz. an intelligent and able man of the
Abenakie tribe, from Canada; an elderly Mountaineer from Labrador; and
an adventurous young Micmack, a native of this island, together with
myself. It was difficult to obtain men fit for the purpose, and the
trouble attending on this prevented my entering on the expedition a
month earlier in the season. It was my intention to have commenced our
search at White Bay, which is nearer the northern extremity of the
island than where we did, and to have travelled southward; but the
weather not permitting to carry my party thither by water, after
several days delay, I unwillingly changed my line of route.

On the 31st of October 1828 [Sic: 30th of October 1827] last, we
entered the country at the mouth of the River Exploits, on the north
side, at what is called the Northern Arm. We took a north-westerly
direction to lead us to Hall's Bay, which place we reached through an
almost uninterrupted forest, over a hilly country, in eight days. This
tract comprehends the country interior from New Bay, Badger Bay, Seal
Bay, &c.; these being minor bays, included in Green or Notre Dame Bay,
at the north-east part of the island, and well known to have been
always heretofore the summer residence of the Red Indians.

On the fourth day after our departure, at the east end of Badger
Bay-Great Lake, at a _portage_ known by the name of the Indian Path,
we found traces made by the Red Indians, evidently in the spring or
summer of the preceding year. Their party had had two canoes; and here
was a _canoe-rest_, on which the daubs of red-ochre, and the roots of
trees used to fasten or tie it together appeared fresh. A canoe-rest
is simply a few beams, supported horizontally, about five feet from
the ground, by perpendicular posts. A party with two canoes, when
descending from the interior to the sea-coast, through such a part of
the country as this, where there are troublesome portages, leave one
canoe resting, bottom up, on this kind of frame, to protect it from
injury by the weather, until their return. Among other things which
lay strewed about here, were a spear-shaft, eight feet in length,
recently made and ochred; parts of old canoes, fragments of their
skin-dresses, &c. For some distance around, the trunks of many of the
birch, and of that species of spruce pine called here the Var (_Pinus
balsamifera_), had been rinded; these people using the inner part of
the bark of that kind of tree for food. Some of the cuts in the trees
with the axe were evidently made the preceding year. Besides these, we
were elated by other encouraging signs. The traces left by the Red
Indians are so peculiar, that we were confident those we saw here were
made by them.

This spot has been a favourite place of settlement with these people.
It is situated at the commencement of a _portage_, which forms a
communication by a path between the sea-coast at Badger Bay, about
eight miles to the north-east, and a chain of lakes extending westerly
and southerly from hence, and discharging themselves by a rivulet into
the River Exploits, about thirty miles from its mouth. A path also
leads from this place to the lakes, near New Bay, to the eastward.
Here are the remains of one of their villages, where the vestiges of
eight or ten winter _mamateeks_ or wigwams, each intended to contain
from six to eighteen or twenty people, are distinctly seen close
together. Besides these, there are the remains of a number of summer
wigwams. Every winter wigwam has close by it a small square-mouthed or
oblong pit, dug into the earth, about four feet deep, to preserve
their stores, &c. in. Some of these pits were lined with birch-rind.
We discovered also in this village the remains of a vapour-bath. The
method used by the Boeothicks to raise the steam, was by pouring water
on large stones, made very hot for the purpose, in the open air, by
burning a quantity of wood around them; after this process, the ashes
were removed, and a hemispherical frame-work, closely covered with
skins, to exclude the external air, was fixed over the stones. The
patient then crept in under the skins, taking with him a
birch-rind-bucket of water, and a small bark-dish to dip it out,
which, by pouring on the stones, enabled him to raise the steam at
pleasure[A].

At Hall's Bay we got no useful information from the three (and the
only) English families settled there. Indeed we could hardly have
expected any; for these, and such people, have been the unchecked and
ruthless destroyers of the tribe, the remnant of which we were in
search of. After sleeping one night in a _house_, we again struck into
the country to the westward.

In five days we were on the high lands south of White Bay, and in
sight of the high lands east of the Bay of Islands, on the west coast
of Newfoundland. The country south and west of us was low and flat,
consisting of marshes, extending in a southerly direction more than
thirty miles. In this direction lies the famous Red Indians' Lake. It
was now near the middle of November, and the winter had commenced
pretty severely in the interior. The country was everywhere covered
with snow, and, for some days past, we had walked over the small ponds
on the ice. The summits of the hills on which we stood had snow on
them, in some places many feet deep. The deer were migrating from the
rugged and dreary mountains in the north to the low mossy barrens and
more woody parts in the south; and we inferred, that if any of the Red
Indians had been at White Bay during the past summer, they might be at
that time stationed about the borders of the low tract of country
before us, at the _deer-passes_, or were employed somewhere else in
the interior, killing deer for winter provision. At these passes,
which are particular places in the migration lines of path, such as
the extreme ends of, and straights in, many of the large lakes,--the
foot of valleys between high or rugged mountains,--fords in the large
rivers, and the like,--the Indians kill great numbers of deer with
very little trouble, during their migrations. We looked out for two
days from the summits of the hills adjacent, trying to discover the
smoke from the camps of the Red Indians; but in vain. These hills
command a very extensive view of the country in every direction.

We now determined to proceed towards the Red Indians' Lake, sanguine
that, at that known rendezvous, we would find the objects of our
search.

Travelling over such a country, except when winter has fairly set in,
is truly laborious.

In about ten days we got a glimpse of this beautifully majestic and
splendid sheet of water. The ravages of fire, which we saw in the
woods for the last two days, indicated that man had been near. We
looked down on the lake, from the hills at the northern extremity,
with feelings of anxiety and admiration:--No canoe could be discovered
moving on its placid surface in the distance. We were the first
Europeans who had seen it in an unfrozen state, for the three former
parties who had visited it before, were here in the winter, when its
waters were frozen and covered over with snow. They had reached it
from below, by way of the River Exploits, on the ice. We approached
the lake with hope and caution; but found to our mortification that
the Red Indians had deserted it for some years past. My party had been
so excited, so sanguine, and so determined to obtain an interview of
some kind with these people, that, on discovering, from appearances
every where around us, that the Red Indians--the terror of the
Europeans as well as the other Indian inhabitants of Newfoundland--no
longer existed, the spirits of one and all of us were very deeply
affected. The old mountaineer was particularly overcome. There were
every where indications that this had long been the central and
undisturbed rendezvous of the tribe, where they had enjoyed peace and
security. But these primitive people had abandoned it, after having
been tormented by parties of Europeans during the last eighteen [Sic:
thirteen] years. Fatal rencounters had on these occasions
unfortunately taken place.

We spent several melancholy days wandering on the borders of the east
end of the lake, surveying the various remains of what we now
contemplated to have been an unoffending and cruelly extirpated
people. At several places, by the margin of the lake, are small
clusters of winter and summer wigwams in ruins. One difference, among
others, between the Boeothick wigwams and those of the other Indians
is, that in most of the former there are small hollows, like nests,
dug in the earth around the fire-place, one for each person to sit in.
These hollows are generally so close together, and also so close to
the fire-place, and to the sides of the wigwam, that I think it
probable these people have been accustomed to sleep in a sitting
position. There was one wooden building constructed for drying and
smoking venison in, still perfect; also a small log-house, in a
dilapidated condition, which we took to have been once a store-house.
The wreck of a large handsome birch-rind canoe, about twenty-two feet
in length, comparatively new, and certainly very little used, lay
thrown up among the bushes at the beach. We supposed that the violence
of a storm had rent it in the way it was found, and that the people
who were in it had perished; for the iron nails, of which there was no
want, all remained in it. Had there been any survivors, nails being
much prized by these people, they never having held intercourse with
Europeans, such an article would most likely have been taken out for
use again. All the birch trees in the vicinity of the lake had been
rinded, and many of them and of the spruce fir or var (_Pinus
balsamifera_, Canadian balsam tree) had the bark taken off, to use the
inner part of it for food, as noticed before.

Their wooden repositories for the dead are what are in the most
perfect state of preservation. These are of different constructions,
it would appear, according to the character or rank of the persons
entombed. In one of them, which resembled a hut, ten feet by eight or
nine, and four or five feet high in the centre, floored with squared
poles, the roof covered with rinds of trees, and in every way well
secured against the weather inside and the intrusion of wild beasts,
there were two grown persons laid out at full length on the floor, the
bodies wrapped round with deer-skins. One of these bodies appeared to
have been placed here not longer ago than five or six years. We
thought there were children laid in here also. On first opening this
building, by removing the posts which formed the ends, our curiosity
was raised to the highest pitch; but what added to our surprise, was
the discovery of a white deal coffin, containing a skeleton neatly
shrouded in white muslin. After a long pause of conjecture how such a
thing existed here, the idea of _Mary March_ occurred to one of the
party, and the whole mystery was at once explained[B].

In this cemetery were deposited a variety of articles, in some
instances the property, in others the representations of the property
and utensils, and of the achievements, of the deceased. There were two
small wooden images of a man and woman, no doubt meant to represent
husband and wife; a small doll, which we supposed to represent a child
(for _Mary March_ had to leave her only child here, which died two
days after she was taken): several small models of their canoes; two
small models of boats; an iron axe; a bow and quiver of arrows were
placed by the side of _Mary March's_ husband; and two fire-stones
(radiated iron pyrites, from which they produce fire, by striking them
together) lay at his head; there were also various kinds of culinary
utensils, neatly made, of birch-rind, and ornamented; and many other
things, of some of which we did not know the use or meaning.

Another mode of sepulture which we saw here was, where the body of the
deceased had been wrapped in birch rind, and with his property, placed
on a sort of scaffold about four feet and a-half from the ground. The
scaffold was formed of four posts, about seven feet high, fixed
perpendicularly in the ground, to sustain a kind of crib, five feet
and a-half in length by four in breadth, with a floor made of small
squared beams, laid close together horizontally, and on which the body
and property rested.

A third mode was, when the body, bent together, and wrapped in
birch-rind, was enclosed in a kind of box on the ground. The box was
made of small squared posts, laid on each other horizontally, and
notched at the corners, to make them meet close; it was about four
feet by three, and two and a-half feet deep, and well lined with
birch-rind, to exclude the weather from the inside. The body lay on
its right side.

A fourth, and the most common mode of burying among these people, has
been, to wrap the body in birch-rind, and cover it over with a heap of
stones, on the surface of the earth, in some retired spot; sometimes
the body, thus wrapped up, is put a foot or two under the surface, and
the spot covered with stones; in one place, where the ground was sandy
and soft, they appeared to have been buried deeper, and no stones
placed over the graves.

These people appear to have always shewn great respect for their dead;
and the most remarkable remains of them commonly observed by
Europeans, at the sea-coast, are their burying-places. These are at
particular chosen spots; and it is well known that they have been in
the habit of bringing their dead from a distance to them. With their
women, they bury only their clothes.

On the north side of the lake, opposite the River Exploits, are the
extremities of two deer fences, about half a mile apart, where they
lead to the water. It is understood that they diverge many miles in
north-westerly directions. The Red Indians make these fences to lead
and scare the deer to the lake, during the periodical migration of
these animals; the Indians being stationed looking out, when the deer
get into the water to swim across, the lake being narrow at this end,
they attack and kill the animals with spears out of their canoes. In
this way they secure their winter provisions before the severity of
that season sets in.

There were other old remains of different kinds peculiar to these
people met with about the lake.

One night we encamped on the foundation of an old Red Indian wigwam,
on the extremity of a point of land which juts out into the lake, and
exposed to the view of the whole country around. A large fire at night
is the life and soul of such a party as ours, and when it blazed up at
times, I could not help observing, that two of my Indians evinced
uneasiness and want of confidence in things around, as if they thought
themselves usurpers on the Red Indian territory. From time immemorial
none of the Indians of the other tribes had ever encamped near this
lake fearlessly, and, as we had now done, in the very centre of such a
country; the lake and territory adjacent having been always considered
to belong exclusively to the Red Indians, and to have been occupied by
them. It had been our invariable practice hitherto to encamp near
hills, and be on their summits by the dawn of day, to try to discover
the morning smoke ascending from the Red Indians' camps; and, to
prevent the discovery of ourselves, we extinguished our own fire
always some length of time before day-light.

Our only and frail hope now left of seeing the Red Indians lay on the
banks of the River Exploits, on our return to the sea-coast.

The Red Indians' Lake discharges itself about three or four miles from
its north-east end, and its waters from the River Exploits. From the
lake to the sea-coast is considered about seventy miles; and down this
noble river the steady perseverance and intrepidity of my Indians
carried me on rafts in four days, to accomplish which otherwise, would
have required, probably, two weeks. We landed at various places on
both banks of the river on our way down, but found no traces of the
Red Indians so recent as those seen at the portage at Badger Bay-Great
Lake, towards the beginning of our excursion. During our descent, we
had to construct new rafts at the different waterfalls. Sometimes we
were carried down the rapids at the rate of ten miles an hour or more,
with considerable risk of destruction to the whole party, for we were
always together on one raft.

What arrests the attention most while gliding down the stream, is the
extent of the Indian fences to entrap the deer. They extend from the
lake downwards, continuous, on the banks of the river at least thirty
miles. There are openings left here and there in them, for the animals
to go through and swim across the river, and at these places the
Indians are stationed, and kill them in the water with spears, out of
their canoes, as at the lake. Here, then, connecting these fences with
those on the north-west side of the lake, is at least forty miles of
country, easterly and westerly, prepared to intercept all the deer
that pass that way in their periodical migrations. It was melancholy
to contemplate the gigantic, yet feeble efforts of a whole primitive
nation, in their anxiety to provide subsistence, forsaken and going to
decay.

There must have been hundreds of the Red Indians, and that not many
years ago, to have kept up these fences and ponds. As their numbers
were lessened so was their ability to keep them up for the purposes
intended; and now the deer pass the whole line unmolested.

We infer, that the few of these people who yet survive, have taken
refuge in some sequestered spot, still in the northern part of the
island, and where they can procure deer to subsist on.

On the 29th November we were again returned to the mouth of the River
Exploits, in thirty days after our departure from thence, after having
made a complete circuit of about 200 miles in the Red Indian
territory.

       *       *       *       *       *

I have now stated generally the result of my excursion, avoiding, for
the present, entering into any detail. The materials collected on
this, as well as on my excursion across the interior a few years ago,
and on other occasions, put me in possession of a general knowledge of
the natural condition and productions of Newfoundland; and, as a
member of an institution formed to protect the aboriginal inhabitants
of the country in which we live, and to prosecute inquiry into the
moral character of man in his primitive state, I can, at this early
stage of our institution, assert, trusting to nothing vague, that we
already possess more information concerning these people than has been
obtained during the two centuries and a-half in which Newfoundland has
been in the possession of Europeans. But it is to be lamented that
now, when we have taken up the cause of a barbarously treated people,
so few should remain to reap the benefit of our plans for their
civilization. The institution and its supporters will agree with me,
that, after the unfortunate circumstances attending past encounters
between the Europeans and the Red Indians, it is best now to employ
Indians belonging to the other tribes to be the medium of beginning
the intercourse we have in view; and indeed I have already chosen
three of the most intelligent men from among the others met with in
Newfoundland to follow up my search.

In conclusion, I congratulate the institution on the acquisition of
several ingenious articles, the manufacture of the _Boeothicks_, some
of which we had the good fortune to discover on our recent
excursion;--models of their canoes, bows and arrows, spears of
different kinds, &c. and also a complete dress worn by that people.
Their mode of kindling fire is not only original, but as far as we at
present know, is peculiar to the tribe. These articles, together with
a short vocabulary of their language consisting of 200 to 300 words,
which I have been enabled to collect, prove the Boeothicks to be a
distinct tribe from any hitherto discovered in North America. One
remarkable characteristic of their language, and in which it resembles
those of Europe more than any other Indian languages do, with which we
have had an opportunity of comparing it,--is its abounding in
diphthongs. In my detailed report, I would propose to have plates of
these articles, and also of the like articles used by other tribes of
Indians, that a comparative idea may be formed of them; and, when the
Indian female _Shawnawdithit_ arrives in St John's, I would recommend
that a correct likeness of her be taken, and be preserved in the
records of the institution. One of the specimens of mineralogy which
we found in our excursion, was a block of what is called _Labrador
Felspar_, nearly four one-half feet in length, by about three feet in
breadth and thickness. This is the largest piece of that beautiful
rock yet discovered any where. Our subsistence in the interior was
entirely animal food, deer and beavers, which we shot.

       *       *       *       *       *

"_Resolved_,--That the measures recommended in the president's report
be agreed to; and that the three men, Indians of the Canadian and
Mountaineer tribes, be placed upon the establishment of this
institution, to be employed under the immediate direction and control
of the president; and that they be allowed for their services such a
sum of money as the president may consider a fair and reasonable
compensation: That it be the endeavour of this institution to collect
every useful information respecting the natural productions and
resources of this island, and, from time to time, to publish the same
in its reports: That the instruction of _Shawnawdithit_ would be much
accelerated by bringing her to St John's, &c.: That the proceedings of
the institution, since its establishment, be laid before his Majesty's
Secretary of State for the Colonial Department, by the president, on
his arrival in England.

(Signed) "A.W. des BARRES, Chairman and Vice-Patron."


Footnotes:

[Footnote A: Since my return, I learn from the captive Red Indian
woman _Shawnawdithit_, that the vapour-bath is chiefly used by old
people, and for rheumatic affections.

_Shanawdithit_ is the survivor of three Red Indian females, who were
taken by, or rather who gave themselves up, exhausted with hunger, to
some English furriers, about five years ago, in Notre Dame Bay. She is
the only one of that tribe in the hands of the English, and the only
one that has ever lived so long among them. It appears extraordinary,
and it is to be regretted, that this woman has not been taken care of,
nor noticed before, in a manner which the peculiar and interesting
circumstances connected with her tribe and herself would have led us
to expect.]

[Footnote B: It should be remarked here, that Mary March, so called
from the name of the month in which she was taken, was the Red Indian
female who was captured and carried away by force from this place by
an armed party of English people, nine or ten in number, who came up
here in the month of March 1809.[Sic: 1819] The local government
authorities at that time did not foresee the result of offering a
reward to _bring a Red Indian to them_. Her husband was cruelly shot,
after nobly making several attempts, single-handed, to rescue her from
the captors, in defiance of their fire-arms and fixed bayonets. His
tribe built this cemetery for him, on the foundation of his own
wigwam, and his body is one of those now in it. The following winter,
Captain Buchan was sent to the River Exploits, by order of the local
government of Newfoundland, to take back this woman to the lake where
she was captured, and, if possible, at the same time, to open a
friendly intercourse with her tribe. But she died on board Captain
B.'s vessel, at the mouth of the river. Captain B., however, took up
her body to the lake; and not meeting with any of her people, left it
where they were afterwards likely to meet with it. It appears the
Indians were this winter encamped on the banks of the River Exploits,
and observed Captain B.'s party passing up the river on the ice. They
retired from their encampments in consequence; and, some weeks
afterwards, went by a circuitous route to the lake, to ascertain what
the party had been doing there. They found _Mary March's_ body, and
removed it from where Captain B. had left it to where it now lies, by
the side of her husband.

With the exception of Captain Buchan's first expedition, by order of
the local government of Newfoundland, in the winter of 1810, [Sic:
1815] to endeavour to open a friendly intercourse with the Red
Indians, the two parties just mentioned are the only two we know of
that had ever before been up to the Red Indian Lake. Captain B. at
that time succeeded in forcing an interview with the principal
encampment of these people. All of the tribe that remained at that
period were then at the Great Lake, divided into parties, and in their
winter encampments, at different places in the woods on the margin of
the lake. Hostages were exchanged; but Captain B. had not been absent
from the Indians two hours, in his return to a depot left by him at a
short distance down the river, to take up additional presents for
them, when the want of confidence of these people in the whites
evinced itself. A suspicion spread among them that he had gone down to
bring up a reinforcement of men to take them all prisoners to the
sea-coast; and they resolved immediately to break up their encampment
and retire farther into the country, and alarm and join the rest of
their tribe, who were all at the western parts of the lake. To prevent
their proceedings being known, they killed and then cut off the heads
of the two English hostages; and, on the same afternoon on which
Captain B. had left them, they were in full retreat across the lake,
with baggage, children, &c. The whole of them afterwards spent the
remainder of the winter together, at a place twenty to thirty miles to
the south-west, on the south-east side of the lake. On Captain B.'s
return to the lake next day or the day after, the cause of the scene
there was inexplicable; and it remained a mystery until now, when we
can gather some facts relating to these people from the Red Indian
woman _Shawnawdithit_.]



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REPORT OF MR. W. E. CORMACK'S
JOURNEY IN SEARCH OF THE RED INDIANS IN NEWFOUNDLAND***


******* This file should be named 13762.txt or 13762.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/3/7/6/13762



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

