The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is Going On
In It, Vol. 1, No. 27, May 13, 1897, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Great Round World and What Is Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 27, May 13, 1897
       A Weekly Magazine for Boys and Girls

Author: Various

Release Date: April 4, 2005 [EBook #15539]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD AND ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team. (www.pgdp.net)







_FIVE CENTS._

THE GREAT ROUND WORLD

AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT

    SUBSCRIPTION PRICE. MAY 13, 1897  Vol. 1. NO. 27
    $2.50 PER YEAR
    [Entered at Post Office, New York City, as second-class matter]

[Illustration]

    A WEEKLY NEWSPAPER FOR BOYS AND GIRLS

    WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON. PUBLISHER

    NO. 3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST. NEW YORK CITY

Copyright, 1897, by WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON.

       *       *       *       *       *

    AS A
    =SPECIAL INDUCEMENT=

    for our subscribers to interest others in "The Great Round
    World," we will give to each subscriber who sends us $2.50 to
    pay for a year's subscription to a new name, a copy of

    =Rand, McNally & Co.=
      =1897 Atlas of the World.=

    =160 pages of colored maps from new plates, size 11 1/2 x 14
    inches, printed on special paper with marginal index, and well
    worth its regular price - - - - $2.50.=


Every one has some sort of an atlas, doubtless, but an old atlas is no
better than an old directory; countries do not move away, as do people,
but they do change and our knowledge of them increases, and this atlas,
made in 1897 from =new= plates, is perfect and up to date and covers every
point on

    =The Great Round World.=

Those not subscribers should secure the subscription of a friend and remit
$5 to cover it and their own. A copy of the atlas will be sent to either
address.

       *       *       *       *       *

GREAT ROUND WORLD,

_3 and 5 West 18th Street, . . . . . . . .New York City._

       *       *       *       *       *

THE GREAT ROUND WORLD
NATURAL HISTORY
STORIES.

A Series of True Stories

BY
JULIA TRUITT BISHOP.

Attractively Illustrated by Barnes.

       *       *       *       *       *

These stories will be issued in parts. Price, 10 cents each. Subscription
price (12 numbers), $1.00. Part 1. issued as supplement to GREAT ROUND
WORLD NO. 20.

       *       *       *       *       *

    =Author's Preface.=

    The stories published in this little volume have been issued
    from time to time in the Philadelphia _Times_, and it is at the
    request of many readers that they now greet the world in more
    enduring form. They have been written as occasion suggested,
    during several years; and they commemorate to me many of the
    friends I have known and loved in the animal world. "Shep" and
    "Dr. Jim," "Abdallah" and "Brownie," "Little Dryad" and
    "Peek-a-Boo." I have been fast friends with every one, and have
    watched them with such loving interest that I knew all their
    ways and could almost read their thoughts. I send them on to
    other lovers of dumb animals, hoping that the stories of these
    friends of mine will carry pleasure to young and old.

       *       *       *       *       *

    =WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON,=
    =3 & 5 West 18th Street.=

       *       *       *       *       *


A Good Agent
Wanted
In Every Town
for
"The Great Round World"


[Illustration: THE GREAT ROUND
WORLD
AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT.]

    VOL. 1   MAY 13, 1897.   NO. 27



The Grant parade is over, the monument given to and accepted by the City
of New York, and the great day has come and gone as such days will,
leaving behind it tired eyes and a confused memory of marching soldiers.

The sections of the parade in which THE GREAT ROUND WORLD took most
interest were those in which the boys paraded, and especially the division
in which the cadets and boys from the military schools marched.

This division was greeted with great enthusiasm all along the line, and
well it might be! The soldierly make-up of these lads was a sight to see,
and their discipline and marching were unsurpassed by any of the
troops--regulars or militia.

The boys walked with a springing step, that showed no signs of fatigue,
even as they rounded the reviewing stand, and reached the goal of their
long march.

Among the many well-drilled companies of boy soldiers, marched one of
artillery.

[Illustration]

This was perhaps the prettiest feature of the whole parade, for
everything was in miniature to match the size of the small artillerymen.

The field-piece which this company boasted was a tiny affair, drawn by two
small ponies, and it had its two baby gunners to serve it.

These gunners were very military babies. They sat bolt upright, their arms
crossed on their fat little chests in true soldier fashion, and no jolting
of the gun-carriage could make those little backs bend, nor those small
arms unfold.

There was also a company of naval cadets. These lads marched finely, with
their cutlasses drawn, and held across their breasts. So steadily did they
grasp their weapons, that it was hard to believe that they were held in
place by nothing stronger than the will of these young heroes.

In every company that marched past, the lads showed a pride and steadiness
that made one think that this boy soldiering was going to be of the
greatest service to them later in life.

Boys are not, as a rule, noted for their neatness, and there are hosts of
fine lads who find it hard to remember that clean hands and collars are
among the necessary things of life.

Knowing this so well, it was all the more remarkable that, in all the long
line of parading cadets, there was not so much as a rebellious lock of
hair visible.

Each boy's buttons were in a straight line with those of the next boy,
each shoulder-strap set at the same angle as its fellows, each gun was as
well polished as its neighbor, and the spick and span appearance the line
presented, after its long fatiguing march, spoke volumes in favor of
military training.

The School-Boy Cadets were without doubt one of the best features of the
parade, and next to them in interest came the boys from the public
schools.

These lads also marched splendidly, with fine bearing and excellent
discipline! And what a fine-looking set of boys they were! They had no
uniforms or guns to help their appearance, nothing but their own bright
faces to show them off, but every mother along the line must have felt
proud to see the kind of lads that her boys are growing up amongst.

Young America showed to very great advantage in the Grant parade, which
will be memorable as the second occasion on which such a great number of
boys were marched in line. The first time was at the Columbus celebration.

It is said that nearly five thousand lads marched.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is somewhat sad to turn from our own beautiful military pageant to the
Graeco-Turkish war.

The people of Europe are speaking very severely about the behavior of the
Powers in regard to Greece.

The decision of the Powers, it must be remembered, is not the result of
the wishes of the people, but rather of the scheming and planning of the
diplomats of the various countries.

The Powers have a great deal at stake in Turkey, and there is no doubt
that, whatever they may say, there is not one of the diplomats who does
not wish to see Turkey get the best of it.

There is a great deal of European money in Turkey, and, shameful as it may
seem, it would appear that this money has played a very important part in
the action of the Powers, a part far above and beyond the fear they all
have, that if Turkey is beaten and the empire divided, some one country
may seize a larger slice of the plunder than another.

Turkey, as we have said before, is bankrupt, and to be able to carry on
her government at all she has had to borrow enormous sums from the rich
men of Europe.

These men fear that if Turkey is defeated they will lose the money they
have lent, and it is openly said that they have been the means of
hampering Greece, until Turkey has had time to gather enough forces
together to crush her.

The people of Europe are indignant that the Powers are doing Turkey's work
for her in Crete, and making it possible for her to bring all her forces
together against the Greeks, instead of having to divide them as the
Greeks have.

The unfriendliness of the Powers toward Greece is shown in a suggestion,
which it was said was the German Emperor's, to blockade the Greek fleet,
keep it in one of its own ports, and prevent it from assisting the army.

This proposal was made after war had been declared.

Germany was supported in this plan by Russia and Austria, and it is said
that the Emperors were so sure of being able to carry their plan through
that they told Turkey she might send all the arms she needed to the
seaports, as they would be perfectly safe from the Greeks.

[Illustration: Evzone, Member of Constantine's Body Guard.]

The rest of the Powers would not hear of this, which was something to
their credit. They spoke so very plainly about it that the three Emperors
gave it up.

Greece is in a most unfortunate position, thanks to the interference of
the Powers, and unless something happens to turn the tide of war in her
favor, she will probably be utterly defeated by the Turks.

The loss of Milouna Pass was a severe blow to Greece, but not half so bad
as the fall of Larissa, which from all accounts appears to have been a
very disastrous affair.

The Greeks appear to have behaved in a very cowardly, rebellious way, and
the whole story is very discouraging.

A battle was fought at Mati, and the Turks, who had swarmed through the
pass, were victorious, and the Greeks were forced to retreat.

Unfortunately there was no good general to manage the movement, and
instead of falling back in an orderly manner, they seem to have hurried
away from the battle in a mob.

A newspaper correspondent who was present says that the men straggled
along sullenly: the soldiers, mule-trains, carts, wagons, guns, and crying
villagers, women, and children in a panic-stricken crowd.

A few officers tried to restore order and to make the soldiers re-form
their ranks; but their efforts were already hopeless, when a cry arose:

"The Turks are upon us!"

At this, the mob began to run for life, helter-skelter, pell-mell,
trampling each other under foot, the soldiers actually shooting any one
who barred their way.

To make things still worse, the retreat had begun at nightfall, and it was
in the darkness of night that the cry, "The Turks are upon us!" was
raised.

As a matter of fact, there were no Turks in sight, and nobody quite knows
how the scare was started.

In their mad rush the people at last reached Larissa, leaving the road
they had travelled strewn with guns and baggage, and dead and dying
comrades.

Arrived in Larissa, the soldiers threw themselves on the ground, taking no
heed of the trumpets calling them to rejoin their regiments.

When morning came the officers collected their men, and formed them into
companies in marching order.

Then the news crept out that Larissa was to be abandoned; and another
scene of confusion followed, the people fighting each other in their mad
endeavors to escape.

Special trains moved out of the city for Volo; the people crowded the
platforms, and even climbed on the roofs of the cars in their eagerness to
get away.

The Greek army retreated to Pharsala, without so much as striking a blow
for Larissa!

So wild a rush was made when Larissa was abandoned, that the soldiers did
not even fold their tents or carry away their baggage.

When the Turks arrived before Larissa, they occupied the very tents left
by the fugitive Greek army.

You may imagine how angry Greece was at this!

The people think that the Crown Prince is not a good soldier, and they are
reported to have demanded his recall.

This indeed seems to be necessary, for even the Turks laughed at the want
of generalship shown in the retreat made by the Greeks.

The Greeks are not cowards by any means, but without good officers to
lead them, the bravest men are of little use.

King George seems fully to understand that his son cannot lead the troops,
and is willing to meet the wishes of the people.

As far as known at the present moment, he has recalled the staff of
officers who advised the Crown Prince, and has sent in their place men who
are thought to be better soldiers.

The loss of Larissa is declared to be solely due to the bad generalship of
the Crown Prince.

The people of Athens were very much enraged when they heard the mistakes
that had been made by the army, and the foolish way that several of the
battles had been lost.

They insisted that the trouble was due to the King's interference in
military matters; they declared that the men he had sent with Prince
Constantine to command the army were not soldiers, but merely favorites at
court.

The Greek fleet and the troops in Epirus may yet do a good deal to offset
the mischief that has been done in Thessaly, but the fate of Greece seems
to depend upon the result of the next few days.

It must not be forgotten that many armies that have met with defeat at
first, have gathered courage, and gained victories that have changed the
whole course of events. With the memories of Marathon, Thermopylae, and
Salamis in their hearts, the Greeks need never despair.

We told you of these celebrated battles in No. 25--in the story of Ancient
Greece. Miss Yonge in her stories of Greek History has written a very
complete and interesting account of them also.

       *       *       *       *       *

There has been quite a stir in the Senate, caused by the new Senator from
Illinois, Mr. Mason.

This gentleman has introduced a resolution asking that the Senate provide
some rule for closing debate, and bringing to a vote questions before that
body.

Although there is a rule in the House of Representatives by which
discussion of any question may be stopped, it has been the custom in the
Senate to allow unlimited discussion, and in some cases this right has
been used to "kill" certain measures. This was attempted a few years ago
when the bill to repeal the "Sherman law" was before the Senate and some
of the Senators think that it is now being employed to kill Mr. Morgan's
Cuban Bill and the Arbitration Treaty.

To prevent this Mr. Mason wishes a rule of cloture (or closure, as it is
called in England) adopted. This is a French word, meaning, to bring to an
ending, or close.

Such a rule was introduced in the English House of Commons by Mr.
Gladstone in 1882, when the debates on the Irish question threatened to be
endless, and the whole business of Parliament was stopped by a few members
exercising their right to speak as long as they chose.

The rule of cloture operates in this way. When the debate has continued
for some time and any member believes that the majority have heard enough,
he introduces a motion that "The question be now put;" and if this is
passed, all debate is stopped, and the presiding officer must immediately
call for a vote on the question which has been under debate.

What has been called "Senatorial courtesy" has heretofore prevented the
passage of a rule of cloture in the Senate, but Mr. Mason thinks that the
transaction of public business is of more importance than any exaggerated
courtesy among the Senators.

       *       *       *       *       *

We spoke last week about the invasion of Hawaii by the Japanese.

It seems that the immigrants, turned back from Honolulu, have made up
their minds to go to California; and it is said that they are trying to
reach San Francisco by way of British Columbia.

It is doubtful if they will be any more welcome here than they were in
Hawaii, and it is probable that means will be found to prevent them from
landing, if they come in large numbers.

We did this with the Chinese, and there is little doubt that we will do
the same with the Japanese, if they begin to trouble us.

There is at this moment a little trouble about the Chinese, and that you
may understand it fully, we will go over the whole matter.

In the early days of emigration to California, those days when the
wonderful discoveries of gold were attracting adventurous spirits, the
Chinese were among the first to go there.

At first they were welcomed and kindly treated, but after a while it was
found that Chinamen would work for less wages than white men, and
therefore obtained employment when the white men were left in idleness.
From this the pioneers came to distrust John Chinaman, and then to dislike
him.

In 1877 there was a serious anti-Chinese riot in California, and five
Chinamen were killed by the mob.

The rioting and the feeling against the Chinese became so serious that
California at last asked Congress to interfere.

The result of this trouble was that a Chinese Embassy was established here
for the protection of the Chinamen, and our Government took steps to
prevent their coming into this country in such numbers.

In 1882 the question came up again, and a bill was passed by Congress,
forbidding Chinamen to enter this country for twenty years.

President Arthur vetoed this bill, on the ground that it did not agree
with our treaty with China. A new bill was then passed, stopping
immigration for ten years, and this Mr. Arthur signed.

By this bill it became a crime, for which people could be imprisoned, to
bring a Chinaman into the country.

In 1892, when the ten years covered by the bill had passed, a fresh bill
called "The Chinese Exclusion Bill" was put through Congress, and made a
law.

By this bill, the landing of any Chinese person was strictly forbidden,
and all Chinamen living in the country were forced to take out a
certificate, licensing them to remain. Any Chinaman found without such a
certificate was to be imprisoned, and sent back to his own country.

The Chinese were much annoyed at this. They protested, but the United
States Government remained firm. In the years that had passed since 1882,
the people had had time to find out that the Chinese did not make good
citizens.

One cause of complaint against them, is that they have brought with them
their horrible habit of smoking opium, introduced it among our citizens,
and in that way alone have done us more harm than they can ever repair.

Besides this, the fact that they would work for less money than our own
workmen was very harmful to our citizens.

Employers will always get their work done for as little as possible, and
if the Chinamen had been allowed to swarm into this country, and work for
the pittance they ask, the result would have been that our own workmen
would have been obliged to take the same miserable wages or starve.

The Chinamen like this country, and are willing to work for anything they
can get, because they are so much better off here than at home.

It is their anxiety to get over to this free land that is causing the
present difficulty.

To make the Tennessee Exposition a great success, Congress resolved to
make it possible for China to send over an exhibit of her wonderful art
works.

A resolution was therefore passed, that the Chinese Exclusion Law shall
not be held to prevent the landing of Chinamen who are going to exhibit at
the Exposition, or whose labor is necessary to prepare the exhibit.

The bill, happily, adds that Chinamen coming to this country on Exposition
business must have a special permission from the Secretary of the Treasury
before they will be allowed to land, and that they can only stay in the
country one year after the close of the Exposition. If found in the
country after that time, they will be arrested, and then sent back to
China.

This was too fine a chance for the Chinese to miss. They started for this
country by the hundred, all declaring that they had special business at
the Fair.

Word was sent to the Secretary of the Treasury that over 2,000 Chinamen
had started for these shores to get the exhibit in order. This seemed so
serious, that the Government began to look into the matter.

Several weeks ago 179 of these undesirable immigrants came into the United
States, and another batch of one hundred and fourteen are waiting to
enter.

As you may suppose, such an invasion as this had to be stopped, and
stopped quickly.

The Secretary of the Treasury sent to the Attorney-General, and asked him
whether, under the new resolution, any and every Chinaman had to be
admitted to this country, or whether he had power to limit the number.

Mr. McKenna, the Attorney-General, gave it as his opinion that the
Secretary of the Treasury has full power to say how many shall be allowed
to enter the country.

The Secretary, Mr. Lyman Gage, then inquired of the Exposition company how
many Chinamen were really necessary to do the work for the Fair. Word was
sent back that only two hundred were required.

On receipt of this, the Secretary of the Treasury determined to put a stop
to the matter at once, and forbade the issuing of permits to more than the
necessary two hundred.

There will be great disgust among the Chinese; the first batch of 179 got
through safely, but only 21 of the second lot will be admitted, and the
rest of them will have to go back to the Flowery Kingdom, sadder but wiser
men.

       *       *       *       *       *

News has come that the town of Guthrie in the new Territory of Oklahoma
has been destroyed by a flood.

The Cottonwood River, which flows through the town, had been so high for
some days that it was feared it might overflow and do some damage, and the
citizens had been watching it, and taking every precaution against a
flood. Men had been stationed on the bridges ready to give the alarm if
the river rose so high that there was danger.

On April 27th the danger appeared to be past, the river fell a few feet,
and though the watchers were still kept at their posts, no one supposed
that a flood would really come.

At six o'clock in the morning of April 28th, the men on the bridges heard
a terrible roaring up the river valley. Convinced that a flood was coming,
they gave the alarm, ringing the fire-bells, and warning the people to
flee for their lives.

So unexpected was the alarm, that the people did not seem to understand
what the danger was. Tornadoes are frequent in that western country, and
some hearing the roar of the flood and thinking that the danger that
threatened them was the wind, rushed to the caves which they had made for
shelter from tornadoes, and these poor people were soon drowned by the
flood.

Others stopped to save what they could, and they, too, were caught by the
water.

Very soon after the alarm was given, a great wave of water came sweeping
down the valley.

It is described as having been thirty feet high and one mile broad.

It swept everything before it, toppling over the houses like cardboard
boxes. The terrified people climbed into trees, and clutched at anything
within reach, to save themselves.

The rush of the water lasted till ten o'clock, then it ceased, and finally
began to subside.

The sudden flood was due to a cloud-burst, which is a great fall of rain
coming down without warning over a very small area of land, the contents
of the whole cloud being discharged at once.

This mass of water rushing into the already swollen river made it burst
its banks, and sweep over the surrounding country.

It is said that about one hundred persons have been drowned, and two
thousand rendered homeless.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is hopeful news for us of the floods in the Mississippi Valley.

The river is falling slightly in some districts, and it is hoped that the
floods will have entirely gone down in the next ten days.

The distress is terrible, however. In some places the river is sixteen
miles wide, and it will take a long time for such a quantity of water to
drain off.

Below New Orleans, for a distance of fifty miles, it is said that the
country is entirely under water.

A serious break occurred in the levee at Keokuk, Iowa, but with this
exception no levees have given way. It is hoped that the worst is over.

       *       *       *       *       *

News comes from Cuba that the Spanish have met with two serious reverses.

At Guamo, in Santiago de Cuba, the Cubans, under General Calixto Garcia,
routed a body of Spaniards 2,000 strong.

The Cubans had mined the roads with dynamite, which they exploded as the
main body of the Spaniards passed over.

During the confusion and fright that followed, the insurgents fell upon
the troops, killing many, and finally putting the whole force to flight.

The second engagement was in the Province of Havana, where the Cubans
played another of their old tricks, and led the Spaniards into a trap they
had prepared for them.

The Spaniards met a small force of Cubans, which retreated before them.
They followed hotly, until suddenly the fleeing insurgents turned and
attacked them, and before the Spaniards had time to make out what this
meant, they were also attacked vigorously from the rear, and found they
had been again entrapped by the enemy.

The fight lasted five hours, and then the Spaniards were obliged to
retreat.

We spoke, a few weeks ago, of the port of Banes which the insurgents had
secured in Santiago de Cuba. It is said that four cruisers and several
gunboats have been ordered there to retake it from the Cubans.

Many people have criticised General Gomez for not gathering his forces
together to fight one big battle which shall decide the war.

The General has written a letter explaining his reasons for fighting the
war in the way he is doing.

He says that the Spanish force is so much larger and better armed than his
own, that he could not hope to win a pitched battle.

It is his opinion that the only way to fight the Spaniards with success is
constantly to worry them with small bodies of men, and waste the Spanish
money in keeping up the army until finally they cannot continue the war
any longer.

He feels sure of success in the end.

       *       *       *       *       *

General Miles, of the United States army, has made a trip to Sandy Hook,
to look at a new method of defence that has just been designed for our
coast-line.

This consists of a concrete wall twenty feet thick, against which is a
huge embankment of sand.

This invention is intended to protect our forts from the terrible shot
fired by the modern guns. As we told you the other day, these guns fire
heavy shot which will pierce through such strong walls that the old
methods of defence are of little use.

Under these circumstances, in considering the kind of coast defence we
would make, it became necessary to find something that would resist these
powerful guns.

It was thought that an embankment of sand, placed in front of the walls of
the fort, would lessen the force of the shot, and render it almost
harmless before it could reach the wall, so a small fort was built as an
experiment.

The result proved to be exactly what the designer had supposed it would
be.

Three guns of different power were tried on the bank, and fired at short
range.

It was found that the sand-bank was an ideal defence.

The heavy shots ploughed into the bank, and, meeting the great resistance
of the sand, were turned out of their course, and forced upward to the top
of the sand-pile, without having reached the concrete wall at all.

The test was considered very satisfactory, especially as such
fortifications can be very easily made all along the coast, and at a very
small expense.

       *       *       *       *       *

Permission has been granted by the President for General Miles, the
commanding general of our army, to go to Greece and study the war there,
and on his way back to visit all the other European nations and observe
their armies. He will make a report to the War Department on his return.

He expected to sail on May 6th.

       *       *       *       *       *

There has been a change in the Ministers who govern Greece. The angry
people demanded the change after the retreat from Larissa.

M. Delyannis resigned his position as Prime Minister, and M. Ralli, the
leader of the Opposition, was chosen in his place.

M. Ralli declared that he was able to save his country, and that he would
do so. His brave words encouraged the despondent Athenians, and he became
the hero of the hour.

He stated that all the trouble had arisen because the army needed thorough
reorganizing, and that as soon as he had taken the oath of office, he
would go to the army, strive to give the soldiers fresh courage, and make
the changes that he considered necessary.

M. Ralli has long been a very important man in Greek politics. His party
has been opposed to that of the King, and he has never hesitated to speak
his mind when he thought things were not being properly conducted by the
King's party.

Seven years ago he called attention to the condition of the army, which he
said needed many changes if it were to be useful in time of war.

His words passed unheeded at that time. Now that he is in power, it is to
be hoped that his work of reorganizing will not come too late to do any
good.

M. Delyannis, the former Premier, was not willing to resign his position
when the King asked him to do so, but when he found that the people were
in such a state of excitement that a change was necessary, he gave up his
charge.

He has behaved very nobly since then.

It was feared that he might be unfriendly to M. Ralli, and do all he could
to hamper the new government, but, instead, he sent word to the new Prime
Minister that though they belong to different political parties, they are
one in their desire to help their beloved country, and that he will
therefore do everything in his power to assist.

[Illustration: KING GEORGE OF GREECE.]

The new Ministry came into office on Thursday, April 29th, and on Sunday,
May 2d, two of the members were at Pharsala, reviewing the troops, and
finding out just what the needs of the army were.

While these events were going on in Athens, many things were happening at
the seat of war.

After the Turks had secured Larissa, they advanced upon the town of Volo,
a seaport on the Gulf of Volo (see THE GREAT ROUND WORLD war map).

This city the Turks captured without much resistance, the soldiers giving
up their arms.

The loss of Volo was another great blow to Greece, because it was the port
to which all the troops, war material, and food for the Thessalian army
were sent.

The military roads in Greece are very few, and as the waterways are so
many and so good, most of the transporting is done by water. Now that they
can no longer use the port of Volo, the Greeks will find it much more
difficult to feed and care for their army.

While the Greeks were still bemoaning their losses, news was brought of
their army's great victory at Velestino.

This town lies at the junction of a railroad which connects Larissa, Volo,
and Pharsala. It is marked on your map.

Here the Greeks made a stand, and, after a fight which lasted for two
days, were victorious.

This success has put fresh heart into the nation; especially as the fall
of Larissa and the news that the army in Epirus had fallen back on Arta,
and given up the hope of taking Janina when it was almost in its grasp,
had sadly disheartened the Greeks.

M. Ralli has decided not to listen to any suggestions about making terms
with Turkey and bringing the war to a close. Instead, he has called on all
Greeks capable of bearing arms to join the army and fight for their
country.

This policy does not quite please the Powers.

Turkey is becoming a little too strong for them. They fear that if she
once takes her place as a powerful and warlike nation, she will no longer
allow Europe to tell her what to do.

For several days after the first disaster to the Greek army, the Powers
expected that Greece would apply to them for help, so they declared that
they would certainly give her no assistance unless she withdrew her army
from Crete.

Greece, however, did not ask for help.

The Powers then turned their attention to Turkey. But Turkey had tasted
the sweets of victory, and bluntly replied that she did not want any
interference.

Finally, the only way for the Powers to get their fingers in the pie
seemed for them to call a conference to look after the interests of both
parties.

This plan was suggested by England, but Emperor William of Germany upset
it very quickly by declaring that Greece must withdraw her troops from
Crete before any steps are taken, and this Greece will not do.

The general opinion is that all hope for Greece is now over. It is thought
that she cannot possibly beat Turkey, and that in the end the Powers will
be obliged to interfere to prevent the Turks from overrunning and
destroying Greece.

The Greeks themselves do not seem to consider their cause hopeless, and
are preparing to continue the struggle.

The army in Thessaly is now under the command of General Smolenski, from
whom much is expected, for he is a fine soldier.

The army in Epirus is once more advancing on Janina.

The fleet has so far done little, and people are much disappointed in
consequence.

The Admiral in charge has also been changed, and it is to be hoped that
the new commanders of both army and navy may do good service for their
country.

    GENIE H. ROSENFELD





Invention and Discovery.


Every boy who is fond of carpentering will be delighted with the little
invention illustrated below.

All boys who are not thoroughly expert joiners know the great difficulties
that lie in the way of making partitions neat and workmanlike in
appearance.

With this little invention it will be possible to give a neatness and a
firmness to corners that few amateurs have been able to attain.

[Illustration]

This patent is a small metal clasp which is laid over the joint and
pressed firmly on every side of it.

It is easily applied, and should be used by all carpenters.

       *       *       *       *       *

This attachment for bicycles seems to be a very useful and sensible one.

It is intended for use on newspaper routes, and is made with a wire
attachment over the front wheel in which the papers can be carried.

Newspaper dealers have to arrange the delivery of the daily papers into
routes, much in the same way that the postmen do the letters they carry,
and a great many boys are employed to carry these papers about.

It takes a long time to walk over the route, and it would save the
newspaper dealers a great deal of time if they could find a better means
of delivering their papers, than the employment of so many small boys.

[Illustration]

With the newspaper rack for bicycles the dealer himself will be able to do
more than half the work, and save himself money, as well as the anxiety
lest his boys are not doing their work properly.

                                    G.H.R.




Letters From Our Young Friends.


    DEAR EDITOR:

    I am glad that the Spaniards have other wars to attend to, so
    that they will let Cuba alone, and so that Cuba can have a
    government of its own and have the island of Cuba. I hope that
    if the Spaniards do not stop fighting Cuba that troops of the
    United States will go and fight the Spaniards out in a hurry.

    My sister takes your GREAT ROUND WORLD, and I have been reading
    it, and enjoy it very much.

    I wish that you would tell us how the flying machine is getting
    along. Yours truly,

                                         EDITH S.
    ONEONTA, N.Y., April 17th, 1897.


MY DEAR EDITH:

Up to the time of answering your very welcome letter we have no fresh news
of the flying machine. As soon as we hear anything that we are sure is
true we will tell you.             EDITOR


    DEAR EDITOR:

    I wish you would get a pattern of the kite. My teacher reads
    your paper, and I am very interested in the newspaper. We have
    it in school. I was seven years old on Sunday. Please put this
    letter in the newspaper. It is the first one I have ever
    written. Yours truly,

                                       HOWELL G.
    BALTIMORE, MD.


DEAR HOWELL:

We are very proud to think that the first letter you have ever written has
been to us. Please write again--often. If you will look in the last number
of THE GREAT ROUND WORLD you will see an answer to Sydney G. about the
kite. We told him just where to find the pattern for it.       EDITOR.


    DEAR EDITOR:

    I want to ask you about the great monster, and did they take him
    to Washington? I am eight years old. Please put my letter in the
    paper. Good-by.                     MURRAY W.S.

    BALTIMORE, MD., March 23d, 1897.


Mr. Merrill, the Acting Curator of the Smithsonian Institution, has been
kind enough to send us the following letter about the monster that was
washed ashore on the coast of Florida.

Our young readers should get _The American Naturalist,_ and read the
article.              EDITOR.


    EDITOR OF THE GREAT ROUND WORLD:

    In reply to your letter of April 4th, I regret to say that the
    nature of the animal which was washed ashore on the coast of
    Florida is still undetermined. Some authorities are inclined to
    regard the remains as a portion of the head of a whale. On pages
    304-307 of the April number of _The American Naturalist_ is a
    very full discussion of the subject by Professor A.E. Verrill,
    of Yale College. This may be of interest to you.

                                Yours respectfully,
                                            GEORGE E. MERRILL,
                                              Acting Executive Curator.
    WASHINGTON, April 9th, 1897.


       *       *       *       *       *

    =MONOGRAMS
                    MONOGRAMS=

    Who is Collecting Monograms?

       *       *       *       *       *

We have been asked by so many of our boys and girls for monograms, that we
have had collections made of some of the prettiest, and can now send them
to any address, postage paid, upon receipt of the price.

The safest ways to remit are by registered letter or postal note.

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW SERIES

    Set A, 50 printed in one color                 75 cents
     "  B, 25    "     " gold, silver, and bronze  75   "
     "  C, 25 embossed in gold, silver, and colors   $1.00
    Complete set, including all three sets            2.25

Address,

WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON
3 and 5 West 18th Street, New York City

       *       *       *       *       *




    That Rust

    ON YOUR WHEEL CAN BE
    TAKEN OFF IN TWO MINUTES
    WITH A RAG AND
    SOME

    Great Round
    World Polisher

    PRICE
    25 CENTS

    FOR SALE BY ALL DEALERS

       *       *       *       *       *


    EXAMINATIONS

    Have you thought of the Relief Maps for examination work?
    Are you following from day to day the war in the East?

    Klemm's Relief Practice Maps

    especially adapted to examination work, as they are perfectly free
    from all political details. Any examination work may be done on them.

    For following the Eastern Question use Klemm's Roman Empire, and
    record each day's events. Small flags attached to pins, and
    moved on a map as the armies move, keep the details before you
    in a most helpful way, especially when you use the Relief Maps.

    SAMPLE SET, RELIEF MAPS (15), $1.00
    SAMPLE ROMAN EMPIRE, - 10 CENTS

    WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON, - - 5 West 18th Street, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

Which Is Your Favorite

_BICYCLE_

You have your choice of any wheel in the market if you send us one hundred
regular subscriptions to the

"Great Round World"

Show the paper to your friends, and you will soon find one hundred people
who will be glad to subscribe. Send the subscriptions in to us as fast as
received, and when the one hundredth, reaches us you can go to ANY dealer
YOU choose, buy ANY wheel YOU choose, and we will pay the bill.

Six-months' subscriptions will be counted as one-half, three-months' as
one-quarter,

_SAMPLE COPIES WILL BE FURNISHED AT HALF PRICE. (SEE OTHER OFFERS)_

Great Round World
3 and 5 West 18th Street, New York City

       *       *       *       *       *

The Special Trial Rate for
TEACHERS will expire June 1st

This rate is $1 a year, net
Regular rate, $2.50 a year


WE TRUST TO RECEIVE YOUR SUBSCRIPTION BEFORE THE
TIME OF EXPIRATION


       *       *       *       *       *

A COPY OF THE PAPER WILL BE SENT TO ANY TEACHER
WHO HAS NOT SEEN IT


We can use school-books in
exchange for subscriptions

_SEE LIST_

       *       *       *       *       *

THE GREAT ROUND WORLD
3 & 5 West 18th Street, New York City





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is
Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 27, May 13, 1897, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD AND ***

***** This file should be named 15539.txt or 15539.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/5/5/3/15539/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team. (www.pgdp.net)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
