The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is Going On
In It, Vol. 1, No. 37, July 22, 1897, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Great Round World and What Is Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 37, July 22, 1897
       A Weekly Magazine for Boys and Girls

Author: Various

Editor: Julia Truitt Bishop

Release Date: May 15, 2005 [EBook #15828]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.(www.pgdp.net)







_FIVE CENTS._

THE GREAT ROUND WORLD
AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT

  Vol. 1                JUNE 3, 1897                No. 30.
[Entered at Post Office, New York City, as second class matter]

[Illustration: A
WEEKLY
NEWSPAPER
FOR
BOYS AND
GIRLS]

Subscription
$2.50 per year
$1.25 6 months


    WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON. PUBLISHER
    NO. 3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST. NEW YORK CITY

=Copyright, 1897, by WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON.=

       *       *       *       *       *

     =TO ANY SUBSCRIBER SECURING
      ... FOR US 1 SUBSCRIPTION=


[Illustration: On Honour's Roll
Tales of Heroes in the
Nineteenth Century]

    =WE WILL SEND POST-PAID ANY ONE OF THE FOLLOWING BOOKS=

THE STORY OF THE INDIAN MUTINY.= By Ascott R. Hope. 4 illustrations.
12mo.

=THE ORCHID SEEKERS.= A Story of Adventure in Borneo. By Ashmore Russan
and Frederick Boyle. Illustrated. 8vo.

=UNDER MANY FLAGS.= Stories of Scottish Adventurers. By Davenport Adams.
Illustrated. 12 mo.

=THE FUR TRADERS OF THE WEST= or, =The Doones of Fowey=. By E.R.
Suppling. 21 full-page illustrations. 8vo.

=LOST IN AFRICA.= A Book of Adventure. By Frederick Whishaw. With
full-page illustrations. 8vo.

=THE DAYS OF BRUCE.= A Story from Scottish History. By Grace Aguilar.
Illustrated. 8vo.

=THE DESERT SHIP.= A Story of Adventure by Sea and Land. By John
Bloundelle-Burton. Illustrated. 8vo.

=NUTTALL'S STANDARD DICTIONARY.= Compiled by the Rev. James Wood.
Illustrated. 8vo. 832 pages.

[Illustration:  The Orchid
Seekers]

=GIRL'S HOME COMPANION.= Edited by Mrs. L. Valentine. Illustrated. 8vo.
Contains full description of indoor and outdoor games and valuable
information concerning embroidery, sewing, and all other occupations and
accomplishments for girls.

=LEGENDS OF KING ARTHUR AND HIS KNIGHTS.= By J.T. Knowells. 8vo.

=ON HONOUR'S ROLL.= Tales of Heroism in the Nineteenth Century. By L.
Valentine. Illustrated. 8vo.

=HARRY RAYMOND.= By Commander Cameron. Illustrated. 8vo.

=WE THREE BOYS.= By L. Valentine. Illustrated. 8vo.

=SEA FIGHTS AND LAND BATTLES.= By Mrs. Valentine. Illustrated. 8vo.

=PUZZLES OLD AND NEW.= By Professor Hoffman. 8vo. With over 500 diagrams
and illustrations.

=MASTERMAN READY.= By Captain Marryatt. Illustrated. 12mo.

=SETTLERS IN CANADA.= By Captain Marryatt. Illustrated. 12mo.

=POOR JACK.= By Captain Marryatt. Illustrated. 12mo.

       *       *       *       *       *

     The above are all cloth-bound, well-made books, and are carefully
     selected for their interest and character....

       *       *       *       *       *

              =The Great Round World=
     =3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST.           NEW YORK CITY=

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration:
     WOODEN PUTTER
     BRASSIE SPOON
     BRASSIE NIBLICK
     DRIVER
     CLEEK
     IRON
     LOFTING IRON
     MASHIE
     NIBLICK
     IRON PUTTER]

     =To any one sending us 2 new subscribers=

     we will send, express paid, any one of the golf sticks shown in
     cut...

=These are the most approved shapes and styles and are made in the best
possible manner=

       *       *       *       *       *

     =2= special golf balls may be had for
                   ... =1= new subscription

       *       *       *       *       *

     =THE GREAT ROUND WORLD=
     =3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST. NEW YORK CITY=

       *       *       *       *       *

Do you Cover your Books?

    THE "ONE PIECE"
    ADJUSTABLE BOOK COVERS

are made of the strongest and best book-cover paper obtainable. This paper
is made in large quantities especially for these book covers and will
protect books perfectly. The book covers themselves are a marvel of
ingenuity, and, although they are in one piece and can be adjusted to fit
perfectly any sized book without cutting the paper, they are also so
simple that any boy or girl can use them; as they are already gummed they
are always ready for use.

A sample dozen will be mailed to any address for 20 cents (or ten two-cent
stamps) if you write

           WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON
    3 and 5 West 18th Street, New York City

       *       *       *       *       *

TO ANY ONE SENDING US


   =8= _NEW...._
       _SUBSCRIBERS_

     WE WILL SEND A

                               =JUNIOR RIFLE=

     22 calibre, highly finished, with rebounding lock, case-hardened
     frame, detachable barrel, automatic shell ejector. Weight 4-1/2
     pounds.

[Illustration: Rifle]

                                      OR


                               =A "Shattuck New=
                               =Model" Shot=Gun=


     Side-snap action, rebounding lock, walnut pistol-grip stock, patent
     fore end, rubber butt, and pistol-grip cap, nickel frame,
     choke-bored, twist-steel barrel. 12 or 16 gauge.

           =THE GREAT ROUND WORLD=
     3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST.          NEW YORK CITY

       *       *       *       *       *

...PREMIUMS...

       *       *       *       *       *

TO ANY ONE SENDING US 4 NEW SUBSCRIBERS

[Illustration: A Pocket Kodak

     Measures 2-1/4 x 2-7/8 x 3-7/8 inches, makes a picture 1-1/2 x 2
     inches, and weighs only 5 ounces. Delivered ready for 12 exposures
     without reloading.]

The Lens is of the fixed focus type, and of sufficient length of focus
(2-1/2 inches) to avoid distortion.

Has improved rotary shutter and set of three stops for lens. The slides
for changing stops and for time exposures are alongside of the exposure
lever and always show by their position what stop is before the lens and
whether the shutter is set for time or instantaneous exposures, thus
acting as a warning.

In the _quality_ of the work they will do, Pocket Kodaks equal the best
cameras on the market. They make negatives of such perfect quality that
enlargements of any size can be made from them.

The Pocket Kodaks are covered with fine leather, and the trimmings are
handsomely finished and lacquered. They are elegant, artistic, and
durable.

=For one more subscription we will send with this camera a bicycle
carrying-case=

       *       *       *       *       *

TO ANY ONE SENDING US 9 NEW SUBSCRIBERS

[Illustration: An Improved
    =No. 4=
   Bulls-Eye

     For pictures 4x5 inches; delivered ready for 12 exposures without
     reloading. Size of camera, 4-7/8 x 5-7/8 x 9-1/4 inches; weight 2
     pounds 2 ounces; length of focus of lens, 6-1/4 inches.]

Fitted with an achromatic lens of superior quality, having a set of
three stops; has two finders, one for vertical and one for horizontal
exposures; and is also provided with two sockets for tripod screws, one
for vertical and one for horizontal exposures. Fitted with improved
rotary shutter, for snap-shots or time exposures. Can be loaded in
daylight. Handsomely finished and covered with leather.

=Both of the above cameras are manufactured by the Eastman Kodak Co.,
Rochester, N.Y., and this is a guarantee of their worth=

                 =THE GREAT ROUND WORLD=
     =3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST.         NEW YORK CITY=

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE GREAT ROUND
WORLD
AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT.]

    VOL. 1   JULY 22, 1897.   NO. 37


The peace negotiations have not made very much progress during the past
week.

Turkey has announced to the Powers that she holds that Thessaly belongs
to her by right of conquest, and she is not willing to give it up.

But the Powers are determined to allow only a sum of money as a war
indemnity, and a rearrangement of the frontier whereby Turkey will gain
certain strategic points.

The Sultan has again asked the Emperor of Germany to help him to secure
Thessaly, but William has declined to interfere in the matter, and has
advised the Sultan to obey the wishes of the Powers.

The Czar of Russia has also written to the Sultan, urging him to accept
the conditions offered, and not delay the negotiations by making demands
on Greece which it will be impossible for her to accept.

The delay in the peace negotiations is causing considerable alarm in
Europe.

It seems that the Sultan's main object in writing to Germany and Russia
has been to gain time.

It is thought that he hopes the Powers will disagree and leave him free
to do as he pleases.

If, however, they still remain as firm as they are at present, he thinks
the delay may give time for the Mohammedans to calm down.

These people are now so excited over the success that has attended the
Turkish arms, that it is feared they will revolt against the Sultan if
he agrees to give up Thessaly.

We told you about the visit of the Sheik ul Islam to the Sultan.

These Sheiks are very powerful persons. It is perhaps a little difficult
to make you understand just how powerful they are, living as you do in a
country where such conditions do not exist.

The Sheiks are leaders of numerous tribes of people to whom their word
is absolute law, and whom they command as entirely as a father commands
his children, and for the reason that the tribesmen are in a measure the
children of the Sheik.

In the olden times family life was much stronger and closer than it is
to-day. The father of a family would continue to govern the affairs of
his sons after they had grown up and married and had families of their
own. Until his death, the father would be the ruler of his own group of
relatives, and when he was gone, his eldest son would become the head of
the family in his place.

As the grandchildren grew up and raised sons and daughters of their own,
the family would grow larger; but, while all obeyed their own fathers,
they also obeyed the rulings of the head or chief of the family.

It was the plan of leadership that we read of in the Bible--the
patriarchal system, as it was called.

The clans of the Highlands of Scotland are formed in a similar manner. A
member of a clan is simply a relative, a person of the same blood and
family as the head of the clan, and according to their custom he obeys
the commands of his chieftain.

In ancient times, when a Highland chieftain went to war, he had the
right to call on every man in the clan to join him. None who were able
to answer the call ever thought of refusing.

In the East to-day the patriarchal system prevails as strongly as ever.
The Sheiks or Chiefs are the rulers of the people, and can control and
command them as they please.

The people of the Eastern tribes are nearly all Mohammedans. As we have
told you before, they think it right to kill those who do not believe in
the Prophet Mohammed.

They would be very glad to gain possession of Thessaly and spread
Mohammedanism throughout the province. They are therefore most unwilling
that the Sultan should allow it to fall again into the hands of the
Greeks.

Should the Sultan consent to the demands of the Powers and restore
Thessaly, the Sheiks might call out their tribes and carry on the war
themselves.

The Sultan has therefore to be very careful not to anger them, and it is
for this reason that he delays, hoping that in time one party or the
other may give in.

The Powers are, however, quite tired of the delay, and the latest
despatch says that they have sent the Sultan a collective note, which
means a letter expressing the sentiments of all the diplomats concerned.

This note states that they cannot allow any further delay, and demands
that the Porte arrive at a decision immediately.

It is also stated on good authority that the Greek Government has
arranged a loan to pay the money that Turkey demands as a war indemnity,
so that just as soon as the peace negotiations are concluded Greece may
be ready to pay the required sum.

       *       *       *       *       *

The report about the wounding of General Gomez has been contradicted.

It seems that the Spaniards and Cubans had an engagement near the Jucaro
Moron trocha.

A body of insurgents under General Vega were trying to join the forces
of General Gomez, when they encountered the Spanish troops.

The insurgents gave battle, and were getting the best of the fight, when
a second Spanish column appeared in sight.

The insurgents, finding themselves outnumbered, retreated.

In the engagement General Vega was wounded, his horse being shot under
him, and he himself falling unconscious to the ground. His staff
surrounded him, and carried him away to a place of safety, but not
before the Spaniards had seen what had occurred.

Knowing Gomez to be in the neighborhood, they supposed it was he who had
been in command, and so the mistake arose.

It is a happy thing for the Cubans that Gomez is still spared to them.
The terrible disasters of the Greek campaign have shown us how necessary
good leaders are.

General Weyler has announced his intention of doing no more fighting
until the close of the rainy season.

He is on his way back to Havana. He has not pacified Santiago de Cuba as
he promised to do, but now declares that it is impossible to attempt any
military operations during the rainy season.

The Cubans do not agree with him. The rain has, so far, not dampened
their ardor.

Every day reports come to us that raids and skirmishes are taking place
all over the island.

On the outskirts of Havana the insurgents are keeping up a constant
fight. They are burning houses, and making the best of every opportunity
to harass the enemy.

A bold attempt was made to capture Fondeviela the other day; some fierce
fighting took place, but the Colonel eventually succeeded in driving off
the Cubans.

The case of Gen. Rius Rivera is likely to be settled without the
interference of the Spanish Government.

The unfortunate soldier is seriously ill, and not expected to live many
days. It is said that he is not dying of his wounds, but of a disease
that has developed since he has been in prison.

A late report says that the discontent among the Spanish soldiers in
regard to their pay has induced their officers to give them permission
to plunder where they can. The few unfortunates who have any property
left are now at the mercy of the soldiers.

This state of distress in the island is in great contrast to the
charming picture of peace and prosperity which it presented a few short
years ago.

A writer in _The Sun_ describes the island as it was before the breaking
out of the first war.

He says that in those days its commerce with this country amounted to a
hundred million dollars a year. It maintained an army of twenty thousand
Spanish soldiers, and its harbors were always filled with Spanish
vessels.

Havana was then one of the gayest capitals in the world. Its streets
were thronged with fine carriages, in which the beauties of the island
took their daily drives. At night all the fashion of the city would
congregate on the Plaza in front of the Governor's mansion, and listen
to the music of the military bands.

The people of the island were loyal and obedient to the wishes of the
mother country. They gave up the treasures of the island in return for a
kindly government.

In those days Spain called Cuba the ever-faithful island, because she
was the only American possession of Spain that still remained contented
under the rule of the mother country.

To travellers she seemed an earthly Paradise, and many were the stories
of the beauties of this favored isle.

No one could say enough pleasant things about its light-hearted, kindly
people, its marvellous vegetation, its lovely flowers, its delicious
fruits, and its generous soil in which anything that was planted would
grow.

When we think of Cuba to-day, laid waste by fire and sword, with barren
fields and starving people, we cannot help feeling that the causes must
have been great which led to such a terrible sacrifice.

       *       *       *       *       *

The only news relating to Hawaiian matters this week is that Japan is
seriously angry with us over the treatment her Minister at Washington
has received at the hands of the Secretary of State.

It would seem that the Japanese are extremely precise and particular
about the way their diplomatic affairs are conducted.

Their idea of what is necessary on such occasions is very different from
ours, and unfortunately the Japanese Ministers both at Honolulu and
Washington have not received the treatment that, according to their
views, is due them.

Minister Hoshi, in Washington, is so indignant that he was not informed
of the negotiations in regard to the treaty, that it is said he has
asked to be recalled to Japan.

His displeasure has been increased by Secretary Sherman's failure to
reply to his letter asking for an explanation.

       *       *       *       *       *

We told you that England had been making arrangements with Portugal to
secure Delagoa Bay, in South Africa, and that this contract, if
concluded, would give Great Britain the control of the only port
available for the people of the Transvaal.

President Krueger is, however, too clever a man to allow this to be done
without making some effort to secure the port for himself.

We told you that Dr. Leyds had been sent to England by the Boer
Government to arrange the trouble over the Transvaal Raid.

Dr. Leyds had a further commission, which he did not mention while he
was in London.

This was to try and secure possession of Delagoa Bay for his own
country.

He went to Paris, and organized a company to buy from Portugal certain
lands in Africa which should include Delagoa Bay, its ports and customs.

To prevent England getting any knowledge of what was going on, the
matter was arranged in Paris, and appeared on the surface to be a French
speculation.

But it has come to light that the large sums of money which will have to
be paid to conclude the matter are being subscribed in part by German
financiers, and the rest by the National Bank of the Transvaal.

It seems that it is an arrangement between Germany and the Transvaal.

As we have told you before, Germany is quite friendly with the South
African Republic, so much so that, at the time of the raid, the Emperor
of Germany very much displeased the English people by sending President
Krueger a telegram congratulating him on his victory over the raiders.

It is said that neither the English nor the Boer-German offer for
Delagoa Bay has as yet been accepted by Portugal.

       *       *       *       *       *

The news from India is of a very serious character.

We told you some months ago how the trees in Bengal province had been
marked, and how the European residents in India feared that it might be
the signal for another mutiny.

It would almost seem that their fears were well grounded.

On the clay of the Jubilee celebration in India the natives killed
Government officers in various parts of the country, and assumed a
hostile and impudent attitude toward Europeans generally.

Last week a riot broke out in one of the suburbs of the city of
Calcutta, and for more than forty-eight hours the mob held the town.

The trouble arose over a mosque or Mohammedan temple.

It is contrary to the rules of their religion to allow mosques to be
built on ground that belongs to unbelievers, but of late the Moslems
have been seizing on buildings owned by Europeans and Hindoos,
converting them into mosques, and then refusing to pay rent for them.

This practice has annoyed the land-owners very much, and at last one
owner, a Hindoo, determined to put an end to the nuisance.

The Mohammedans had seized a mud hut which he owned, and as usual they
refused to pay rent for it. The Hindoo appealed to the British
Government, and under its protection sent workmen over and had the hut
demolished.

This enraged the Mohammedans.

The hut had been converted into a mosque, and they regarded its
destruction as a wicked act.

They rose against the Europeans under whose authority this had been
done, attacked them, and the soldiers had to be called out to quell the
disturbance.

The riots lasted for two days. At the end of that time it was reported
that to pacify the mob the authorities had given them possession of the
land on which the mosque had stood.

The European residents were very angry when this news reached them. They
feared that it would make the people still more unruly, as they would be
sure to think the authorities were afraid of them if they gave in to
their demands.

This prediction appears to have been correct, for even after the rioters
had been subdued, it was unsafe for Europeans to venture into some parts
of Calcutta without protection.

It is stated that the authorities did not really give up the land, but
only allowed the rumor to be circulated for the sake of pacifying the
mob. The police have possession of the disputed property, and will not
allow any one to approach it.

It has developed that notwithstanding the fact that the owner of the
land was a Hindoo, there is no really bad feeling between the Hindoos
and the Mohammedans, but that both have combined against the Europeans.

It is distinctly an anti-European feeling. British authority is openly
defied by the natives, and the situation is regarded as very grave.

In Simla, which is the summer home of the Viceroy of India, there has
been more rioting.

A mob tried to seize upon a mosque, but the police and soldiers opened
fire on them, and a serious fight ensued.

The mob was finally repulsed, and the leader arrested.

Simla, which is one of the most fashionable of the Indian summer
resorts, is built high up among the Himalayan Mountains.

The seat of the government of India is really in Calcutta, but the heat
there is so intense during the summer months that the Europeans cannot
endure it.

For fully half the year the Viceroy, who is the representative of the
Queen, moves up to Simla, with his council and household, and the
government is carried on there.

That riots should have occurred at the seat of government makes the
Europeans still more uneasy.

Nor are these the only disturbances we have to record.

In a recent number we told you about the attack on one of the government
officials in the Fochi Valley.

There has been a fresh outbreak in the same place. A number of coolies
or porters, who were carrying provisions, were attacked and robbed.

This time the attacking party did not meet with such success. The
military commanders have been on the alert since the last outrage, and
no sooner was the news of the attack telegraphed, than a body of cavalry
started in pursuit of the offenders.

They were overtaken before they had time to reach their hill dwellings,
and fifty of them were captured and brought back as prisoners.

It is little to be wondered at that these various disturbances, coming
so closely one upon the other, should be causing the Europeans in India
a great deal of uneasiness.

It may be that the memories of the mutiny make them a little
over-anxious, but the situation is certainly very serious.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is a report that the Siamese have invaded the French possessions
in Indo-China.

The French colonies in Asia consist of Cochin China, Tonquin, Anam, and
Cambodia, and since the year 1896 a large portion of Siam has been added
to them.

All these provinces lie to the east of Burmah and Siam, at the extreme
southeast of Asia.

The telegrams state that Cambodia has been invaded by the Siamese, who
have pillaged and burned many villages and carried off a number of
prisoners.

In Bangkok, which is the capital of Siam, and also in the provinces
ceded to France, French authority is no longer acknowledged.

The Siamese demand taxes of the people, and when they insist that they
are under French protection and must pay their taxes to France, their
claims are not listened to. All their papers which relate to the subject
are destroyed, and they are forced to pay the taxes demanded.

When the French in their turn ask for the taxes, the people naturally
refuse to pay them twice; then there are lawsuits, and the people who
will not pay are brought before the judges.

This, however, does little good to the French, for the courts refuse to
hear French complaints.

Some of the Cambodian chiefs who are under French protection have been
arrested by the Siamese, thrown into prison, and kept there many months
without being brought to trial.

It is thought that the King of Siam needs a lesson to teach him to be
more respectful to his European neighbors.

You remember that in the case of United States Vice-Consul Mr. Kellet at
Bangkok, that the trouble arose from the Siamese trying to seize the
property of an American citizen named Cheek, and that Siam did not want
to make amends for the wrong.

It seems that the French difficulty arises from much the same cause. The
Siamese Government does not like to see the taxes going out of its
hands, and so, despite its treaties, seizes them for itself.

The spread of civilization into Asia has taught these Eastern monarchs
many things, and they are no longer simple, docile people, who can be
overawed by the knowledge and power of the Europeans.

The Japanese have recently come to the front as a nation, and it would
not be surprising if the Siamese followed their example.

The King of Siam, who has just been visiting Europe to attend the
Jubilee celebrations, appears to be a clever and progressive monarch.

He has been visiting Rome, and has of course been taken to see the
wonderful art treasures that this very ancient city contains. His guides
were much impressed by the correct taste the King displayed in matters
of art. They declare that no artist could have made better comments on
the various pictures and statues shown him than this King of Siam, to
whom examples of Greek art were new.

The history of Italy and the deeds of its great men were also familiar
to this far-away King. In passing through one of the galleries he saw
the statues of King Victor Emmanuel of Italy and of Garibaldi, the two
men who had worked so bravely for the liberty of Italy.

The King of Siam stopped before these statues, uncovered his head, and
paid silent homage to the noble deeds of these two great heroes. His
suite followed his example, all the gentlemen in his train bowing with
uncovered heads and passing silently on.

The King also appears to have a keen sense of humor.

He was invited by one of the scientific societies of Rome to attend a
lecture on some very deep subject, in which he was not at all
interested.

He did not want to attend, but confided to King Humbert that he feared
the professors would call him a barbarian if he stayed away. So to the
lecture he went.

On his return King Humbert asked him how he had enjoyed it.

"To be frank with you," he replied, "it is even stronger at putting you
to sleep than our opium."

When the news of the trouble in Siam was telegraphed, the King declared
that he knew nothing of the affair. If he is as clever as they say, he
probably keeps himself thoroughly acquainted with everything that is
happening in his kingdom.

The chances are that he knows all about the matter, but does not want it
mentioned until his pleasure trip is over.

       *       *       *       *       *

A sad story of a wrecked steamer has just reached us.

The vessel, the _Aden_, was one of the steamers which carry passengers
from Europe to India, passing through the Suez Canal.

Heavy winds and storms have been raging in the Indian Ocean for some
weeks past; in fact, the storms and the earthquake about which we told
you came at the same time.

The unfortunate steamer was caught in one of these tempests, and driven
on a reef off Socotra Island.

Socotra is at the mouth of the Gulf of Aden. It is into this gulf that
the Red Sea flows.

As soon as the accident occurred the life-boats were launched, and some
of the passengers and crew were put aboard them.

Unhappily the sea was running so high that the boats could not live in
it. They were soon overturned and their occupants drowned.

Two other boats were smashed to pieces in the effort to launch them, and
finally seven persons found themselves forced to stay by the wreck.

The accident happened in the dead of night, and until the daylight came
they were clinging together, expecting that the vessel would go down at
any moment.

When morning came they found that the ship was so tightly wedged on the
rocks that she was not likely to sink, but they were out of sight of
land, and had no chance of rescue unless some passing vessel happened to
see them.

To add to their misery, great waves were constantly washing over the
wreck. They had taken refuge in one of the deck cabins, and here they
were forced to stay for three or four days until the waters became
calmer.

They were at first afraid that they would be starved, but a few biscuits
were found in the cabin, and on these they subsisted until it was safe
to cross the deck to the cook's galley without danger of being washed
overboard. Here they found provisions.

Two women were of the party, and they appear to have behaved very well,
doing their share toward making their comrades comfortable, and
preparing the best meals they could under the circumstances.

When the storm was so far abated that they dared to go on deck, they set
signals, in the hopes of attracting some passing vessel.

Two vessels, however, passed without noticing them, but at last, after
fourteen days of anxiety and fear, help came to them.

They were taken off the vessel and brought safely to land.

The owners of the _Aden_ made full inquiry into the cause of the
disaster, and attributed it to the storm, and not to any carelessness on
the part of captain or crew.

       *       *       *       *       *

There will have to be a new trial of the case against the Tobacco Trust,
the jury having been discharged by the court.

We told you, in reference to the _Laurada_ trial, that it was necessary
for all the twelve jurymen to agree before a verdict could be secured.

When a trial is finished and the case is given to the jury, the jurymen
in the charge of the sheriff are locked up in the jury-room and kept
there until they arrive at a decision or the judge dismisses them.

When the jurors arrive in their own room, a ballot is taken, and if the
vote is not unanimous they begin a regular discussion of the case. A
foreman of the jury is chosen at the beginning of the trial, and serves
as chairman of the jury while the case is in their hands.

After he thinks the matter has been well weighed, the foreman asks the
jurymen if they are ready to vote. Another ballot is then taken, each
man registering his opinion.

The foreman counts the votes.

If the jury is not all of the same way of thinking, the matter is again
discussed and a new ballot taken.

In the Tobacco Trust trial the jury was "out," as it is called,
twenty-one hours. During that time forty ballots were taken, ten of the
jury voting "guilty" and two "not guilty."

At the end of that time one of the jurors was taken ill. The foreman
sent a request for a doctor, and asked the judge to dismiss the jury, as
it was impossible for them to come to a decision.

The judge has the right to keep the jury locked up until he is satisfied
that they cannot arrive at a verdict.

In this instance he kept them three hours longer, and then, finding them
still divided ten to two, he discharged them.

In English and American law there are only two verdicts, "Guilty" or
"Not guilty," and a person who has once been adjudged not guilty can
never be tried again for the same crime. In Scotland they have a third
verdict--"Not proven." Under this verdict a person regains his liberty,
but he can be tried again at any time that fresh evidence against him is
secured.

The jurors would probably have agreed on the verdict of "Not proven" had
it been in use in our courts, but, as it is, there will have to be
another trial of the Tobacco Trust as soon as the District Attorney is
ready to prosecute.

       *       *       *       *       *

People living in New York have long complained of the lack of
accommodation on the surface and elevated roads.

During the crowded hours of the day it does not seem possible to put on
enough cars to seat the passengers.

Men and women have to stand in these crowded cars, packed as closely as
herrings in a barrel.

After enduring this nuisance for many years with surprising patience,
the people have at last sought the aid of the Board of Health.

They have complained to the Board that standing in the cars is injurious
to the health of women and persons in delicate health.

When the summer came on and the crowding nuisance was not abated, but
the discomforts were considerably increased by the neglect of the
companies to provide straps in the open cars for the people to hold on
to, the complaints increased to such an extent that the Board of Health
decided to take immediate action.

A careful investigation was commenced, and it was found that in rounding
the curve at Fourteenth Street and Broadway, and the sharp curves at
Fifty-third Street, every person who was not provided with a seat was in
danger of losing life or limb.

The standing passengers were jostled, jolted, and flung this way and
that, without sufficient protection against being thrown off the cars.

Inspectors from the Health Board were stationed at the different points
to ascertain just how many persons were forced to travel in this
dangerous manner.

The inspector detailed to watch the Lexington Avenue branch of the cable
road reported that during two hours, 1,750 had been standing up in the
135 cars that had passed him.

From the various reports it was seen that most of this crowding could be
stopped if the companies made rules to regulate the number of passengers
allowed in each car, and provided enough cars to accommodate their
patrons.

When the reports were all in, the Health Board met to discuss the
matter.

One of its members is the President of the Board of Police. His
department has had a great deal of trouble with the Broadway Cable
Company.

It has been necessary to station extra policemen along the route to help
people to cross the tracks in safety. Several policemen have been
injured at the curves, and the Police Board has no love for the
railroad.

At the meeting he introduced a resolution which he wished to make a part
of the Sanitary Code.

The Sanitary Code is a set of rules enacted for the protection of the
lives and health of the citizens. These rules relate to all matters that
concern our daily life. They prohibit unhealthy businesses being carried
on. They require that tenement houses shall be properly built, drained,
etc. They prevent the keeping of cows, pigs, or poultry within city
limits. They regulate the sale of provisions, and prevent unwholesome
food being sold in the city. Under these rules, all the meat that is
dressed for market within the limits of the city is inspected, and must
be prepared in a certain manner. No one can offer milk for sale without
a permit from the Board of Health, and this permit is only granted when
the inspectors have assured themselves that the applicants have clean
and airy places in which to handle the milk.

The Sanitary Code covers everything that applies to our health and
comfort, and, as you may suppose, its rules are very far-reaching.

The new rule proposed by the Police Commissioner is to the effect that
no surface car shall be sent around any curve at a greater rate of speed
than two miles an hour.

This rule, if passed, will put an end to the horrors of Dead Man's
Curve, as the Fourteenth-Street curve has come to be called, for at this
slow pace the passengers will have no difficulty in keeping their feet,
and the pedestrians will easily be able to get out of the way of the
cars.

It will be two weeks before this rule can be made part of the Sanitary
Code, and during that time arguments for and against it will be heard by
the Department.

If the Health Board will only follow this rule with another, forbidding
the overcrowding of cars, New Yorkers will have a chance of getting
comfortable service from the car systems.

       *       *       *       *       *

We told you about the great Yerkes telescope some little while ago.

It has, if you remember, the largest lens in the world, and with it
astronomers can look farther into space than with any other glass now in
existence.

At the end of last May the big telescope was in position, and the
scientific world waited anxiously to hear of the wonders it would
reveal.

Professor Barnard, who is in charge of the observatory, stated that it
was impossible even to guess what discoveries might be made with it.

He stated that it allowed the observer to penetrate one-fourth farther
into space than the famous Lick telescope. It was therefore to be
supposed that some new knowledge about the moon and the planets would
soon be obtainable.

He expected that in the course of a few weeks he would be able to give
some new information about the planet Jupiter and its moons, and Saturn
and its rings. He hoped also to give a fuller description of the hills
and valleys on the desolate surface of the moon.

Unfortunately his hopes will not be fulfilled for a long time to come.

But eight days after the first peep had been obtained through the great
glass, a very unfortunate accident happened in the observatory.

The elevating floor of the telescope gave way, and fell forty feet, to
the bottom of the dome.

Two astronomers had been observing the stars the entire night, but
happily they had left the building just before the accident occurred. As
good luck would have it, the great telescope was also uninjured, but a
great deal of damage was done to the building.

It is estimated that it will take the whole summer to tear out the
wreckage and make the repairs.

During that time the telescope cannot be used. This is a great
disappointment to the scientists.

We told you of the labor entailed in the grinding of a lens.

Mr. Alvan G. Clark, the man who made the great glass of which we have
been speaking, has just died.

He and his father and brother had devoted their entire lives to the
making of telescopes, and made many of the famous glasses of the world.
The great glass at the Lick Observatory, which measures thirty-six
inches across, is of their manufacture.

Their greatest triumph was the Yerkes lens, which is forty inches in
diameter, and which was completed only a few months before Mr. Clark's
death.

This firm did a great deal to further astronomical research. Not only
did they manufacture such perfect instruments that the possibilities of
observing the stars were greatly increased, but they were close students
of the science themselves. Mr. Alvan G. Clark, in particular, made
several important discoveries, having found no less than fourteen new
stars.

       *       *       *       *       *

We told you about the _Holland_, the new submarine boat which has just
been launched at Elizabeth-port.

It will interest you to know that she has had a partial trial, which has
proved very satisfactory.

While she was still at the wharf an attempt was made to submerge her. On
the turning of the lever she sank, inch by inch, until only her tower
was out of water.

A day or two after she was taken for a spin down Staten Island Sound.

She attracted a good deal of attention among the seamen, who looked
rather askance at the strange cigar-shaped craft that shot through the
water.

From all accounts it would appear that her crew do not regard her with
very much favor.

It is said that the swish of the waters against her sides can be heard
very distinctly in the engine-room, and that the crew feel somewhat
nervous about her seaworthiness.

Several of these fish-like boats are being made just now. One has just
been completed in Wisconsin, in which it is hoped to explore the bottom
of Lakes Michigan and Huron.

Like the _Holland_, this boat can move on the surface of the water or
dive beneath it at will. But this vessel is arranged with a view to
remaining under water for a whole day without causing any inconvenience
to the inmates.

This is not the only kind of curious vessel that has been built lately.

A ship has been devised, and is said to be actually building in Toronto,
Canada, which is intended to roll across the Atlantic Ocean.

The description of this boat says that it looks exactly like a long
gas-pipe. It has neither masts nor funnels, but is made of two
cylinders, one inside the other.

The outer case revolves, and is fitted with paddles to propel the vessel
through the water. It is claimed that by this means a very high rate of
speed can be secured.

The inner cylinder is so arranged that it remains stationary, and in
this are the cabins, staterooms, and engine-rooms. Both cylinders have
openings at the ends, and it is through these openings that the fresh
air is communicated to the staterooms.

Between the inner and outer cases are compartments for the cargo, which
revolves with the outer cylinder.

It is claimed that this ship will make the trip from Liverpool to New
York in forty-eight hours.

The boat is to be completed in a few weeks, and then we shall see for
ourselves how much truth there is in this startling assertion.

                                                  G.H. ROSENFELD.




NEW BOOKS.

We have received two very attractive books from Ginn & Co., Boston.

"Short Stories from English History," by Albert F. Blaisdell (price, by
mail, 50 cents), is a collection of very attractive stories of English
history, and a book that our boys and girls will be much interested in.

"A Few Familiar Flowers," by Margaret Warner Morley, author of those
charming books, "Song of Life," "Seed Babies," etc., will prove most
useful to any one who wishes to study in detail the familiar flowers.
Price is 70 cents by mail.

       *       *       *       *       *

     TO ANY ONE SENDING US

     [Illustration: Gold-plated Watch]

     =4= [Illustration: Flourish]
         =New=
         =Subscriptions=

     WE WILL SEND
     EXPRESS PAID

     A stem-wind, stem-set, nickel movement, jewelled balances,
     porcelain dial, highly finished throughout

     =Gold-Plated=
        =Watch=

     EITHER OPEN FACE OR HUNTING CASE. ENGINE-TURNED (AS SHOWN IN CUT)
     OR WITH A HANDSOME ENGRAVED DESIGN ON CASE.

[Illustration: Divider]

These watches are made in one of the best-known American factories, are
not clocks but real watches, and are _warranted_ to keep time
accurately.

[Illustration: Divider]

            THE GREAT ROUND WORLD
     3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST.  NEW YORK CITY

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Net]

TO ANY ONE SENDING US

     =12 New ...=
        =Subscribers=

                    WE WILL SEND (EXPRESS PAID) A FULL

                           =Lawn Tennis Set=

                            CONSISTING OF

                          3 "BOY'S" RACQUETS
                          1 "DRIVE" RACQUET
                          4 STANDARD TENNIS BALLS
                          1 NET, 27 x 3 FEET
                          2 JOINTED POLES
                          1 MALLET
                          1 SET OF GUY ROPES

     Complete in neat box, with set of this year's rules.

[Illustration: Divider]

            THE GREAT ROUND WORLD
     3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST.  NEW YORK CITY

       *       *       *       *       *

                    TWO BRIGHT LITTLE BOOKS

                  =For Our Brothers and Sisters=

MARY CATHERINE JUDD has rewritten some of those fascinating old fairy
stories and put them in a little book called =Classic Myths=, price 50
cents. Some of the stories are:

     =Legend of the North Wind; King Neptune and Winds and Waters; Echo,
     the Air Maiden; Iris, the Rainbow Queen; Tennyson's Lullaby;
     Orpheus, Myth of the South Wind; The Bag that was a Balloon; Hail,
     or the Bird with Arrow Feathers; Phaeton, Myth of the Sun; Diana,
     Queen of the Moon.=

A book of the same kind for our very small brothers and sisters is
=Skyward and Back=, price 30 cents, post-paid.

The little stories in this book are old favorites, and were selected by
other boys and girls; some of them are:

     =King Sun; Air Fairies; Ice King; Water Fairies; Cloud-land
     Fairies.=

=_Copies of these books will be sent post-paid upon receipt of price_=

            WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON
     3 and 5 West 18th Street, New York City

       *       *       *       *       *

TO ANY ONE SENDING US [Illustration: Flourish]

           =5=
     =New Subscribers=

[Illustration: Seat]

     WE WILL SEND, EXPRESS PAID, THE NEW... ... ... ... ... ...

                     =Messinger Bicycle Saddle=
                       WITH SPRING ATTACHMENT

     The hard, unyielding saddles usually put on bicycles are
     uncomfortable and unhealthy. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..

[Illustration: Seat]

The Messinger Saddle is made of woven rattan, covered with felt and
leather, and is elastic, healthy, and comfortable. The spring attachment
is so arranged that the saddle yields to pressure on either side or both
at once, thus overcoming all jar and vibration.

            THE GREAT ROUND WORLD
     3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST.  NEW YORK CITY

       *       *       *       *       *

                          =TO ANY ONE SENDING US=

                                 =...3...=
                              New Subscribers

[Illustration: Book-Rest]


                                              OAK
                     WE WILL SEND A           WALNUT
                   =Lambie Book-Rest=     IN  CHERRY
                                              JAPANNED
                                              OR BRONZED

     This book-rest holds the book in any position and at any slant, so
     that you can shift the book when you change your position as freely
     as you can move your hand. Can be made fast to chair, table, or
     lounge on either side.

                      A VERY USEFUL AND CONVENIENT THING

=And for 5 Subscribers a=

=Lambie Dictionary-Holder=

     Can be used for any dictionary or large book. Keeps book open or
     shut, as desired. Holder carries the weight and you handle it as if
     it weighed nothing. Revolves, and is on castors. Can be drawn to
     you with one hand. Can be raised or lowered.

=IN OAK, WALNUT, OR CHERRY
JAPANNED OR BRONZED....=

[Illustration: Dictionary Holder]

               THE GREAT ROUND WORLD
     3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST.  NEW YORK CITY

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: The Scientific Box Kite

How to put in the sticks

The Start]

                         =PATENT APPLIED FOR=
                         =The Latest Thing...=
                         =Scientific Box Kite=

     To any one sending us =1= new subscriber we will send one of these
     kites.

Scientific kite flying has attracted the attention of the world. This
kite is the invention of H.H. Clayton, Chief Observer at Blue Hill
Observatory, near Boston. It is used at this and other weather stations
for sending up instruments in making observations. Kites of this type
have attained the wonderful height of 9,200 feet, nearly two miles.

Anybody can fly this kite. It goes up straight from the hand like a
bird. Will fly in a moderate breeze, and yet no wind short of a gale is
too strong for it. It is made of strong, selected wood, and the finest
cotton, in red.

                    =THE GREAT ROUND WORLD=
     =3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST.              NEW YORK CITY=





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is
Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 37, July 22, 1897, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD ***

***** This file should be named 15828.txt or 15828.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/5/8/2/15828/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.(www.pgdp.net)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

