The Project Gutenberg EBook of Mound-Builders, by William J. Smyth

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Mound-Builders

Author: William J. Smyth

Release Date: March 12, 2006 [EBook #17969]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MOUND-BUILDERS ***




Produced by Thierry Alberto, Diane Monico, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net. (This file was produced from images
generously made available by the Canadian Institute for
Historical Microreproductions (www.canadiana.org).)









MOUND-BUILDERS

BY

REV. W. J. SMYTH, M.A., B.Sc., Ph.D.

_Pastor of St. Joseph Street Presbyterian Church, Montreal._


PUBLISHED BY REQUEST OF NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY,
TORONTO.


MONTREAL:
GAZETTE PRINTING COMPANY.
APRIL, 1886.




MOUND-BUILDERS

BY REV. WILLIAM J. SMYTH, M.A., B.Sc., Ph.D.


When the early settlers began to pioneer the unbroken forests of North
America, they considered the various Indian tribes to be the true
Aborigines of this continent. But long before the red man, even long
before the growth of the present forests, there lived an ancient race,
whose origin and fate are surrounded with impenetrable darkness. The
remains of their habitations, temples and tombs, are the only voices
that tell us of their existence. Over broad areas, in the most fertile
valleys, and along the numerous tributaries of the great rivers of the
central and western portions of the United States, are to be found
these wonderful remains, of the existence and origin of which, even
the oldest red man could give no history.

Following in the track of these ancient tumuli, which have been raised
with some degree of order and sagacity, we are bound to believe that
they were constructed by a very intelligent and somewhat civilized
race, who during long periods enjoyed the blessings of peace, but like
most nations of the earth, at times were plunged in the horrors of
war. We cannot tell by what name these strange people were known
during their existence. But archaeologists, to keep themselves safe,
have given them the name of "Mound-builders," from the nature of the
structures left behind them.

Of this wonderful, semi-civilized, prehistoric race, we have no
written testimony. Their mysterious enclosures, implements of war, and
comparatively impregnable fortifications, together with a few strange
tablets, are the only evidence of their character, civilization, and
doom. No contemporary race, if such there existed on this continent,
has left any record of them.

The mounds they have left are found in the western part of the State
of New York, and extend, it is said, as far as Nebraska. And as they
have lately been found in the Northwest, they have thus a much more
northern limit than was at first thought, while the southern limit is
the Gulf of Mexico.

Having seen only a few mounds in Illinois, Indiana and Kentucky, I
must confine my paper to those found in the State of Ohio, where,
during a residence of seventeen months, I made the closest
investigation my time and duties permitted. In Ohio, the number of
mounds, including enclosures of different kinds, is estimated at about
13,000, though it requires the greatest care to distinguish between
the mounds proper and those subsequently erected by the Indians. In
some parts they are very close together, which is strong evidence that
these regions were densely populated. In others, a solitary mound,
with adjacent burial mounds, gives us the idea of a rural village or
town.


ENCLOSURES.--In the State of Ohio, alone, there have been found 1,500
enclosures. Some of these have walls ranging in height from three to
thirty feet, enclosing areas of from ten to 400 acres. Those areas,
enclosed by strong walls, erected in regions difficult of access, were
undoubtedly intended as military enclosures; while those areas
enclosed by slight walls, with no mounds to cover the openings, were
intended as sacred enclosures. I shall leave the consideration of the
sacred enclosures until I describe the temple, or sacrificial mounds,
giving a brief outline of some of the famous fortifications built by
those strange people.

Within convenient distance of the city of Xenia, on Little Miami River
in Warren county, Ohio, can be seen at any time that famous enclosure
known as "Fort Ancient." There can be no mistake as to the intention
of this wonderful enclosure. It is situated on the east bank of the
Miami on a most commanding position. On the east, two ravines
originate, running on either side towards the river, leaving the great
fortress on an elevation of 230 feet above the river. The whole is
surrounded by a wall of five miles in length, but owing to the uneven
course of the river, there are only enclosed one hundred acres. The
wall has numerous openings, which, however, are well protected by
inner walls, or mounds. These openings could be occupied by warriors
while the interior would not be exposed to the enemy. Within the
enclosure are disposed twenty-four reservoirs, which could be
dexterously connected with springs, so that in time of siege, they
would be comparatively independent. The strength of this fortress does
not depend on the walls alone, which range in height from five to
twenty feet, but upon its isolated position and steep sides. Near the
fortification are two large mounds from which run two parallel walls
for 1,350 feet, and then unite, enclosing another mound. We cannot
tell what part these outer walls and mounds played in the defence of
this fortification. But we know that all give evidence of an immense
garrison occupied by an ancient and somewhat civilized race, whose
numerous enemies, doubtless, forced such strong defence. In point of
inaccessibility, engineering skill, and strength, this famous
enclosure will compare not unfavorably with Edinburgh Castle, the
stronghold of Quebec, or the impregnable Gibraltar.

Another stronghold of considerable importance may be seen at Fort
Hill, in Highland county, on an elevation of 500 feet, and enclosing
an area of forty acres. There is another near Piqua, on a hill 160
feet high; and another near the city of Dayton, on a hill 160 feet
high, where a mound is enclosed, which like the ancient watch-towers
of Scripture, can command a view of the whole surrounding country.
Near Carlisle lies the site of another remarkable military enclosure,
which overlooks the fertile valley, between the Twin and Miami Rivers.
Two deep ravines fortify the north and south sides, while an almost
perpendicular bluff fortifies the east. The wall which is partly of
earth and partly of stone is 3,676 feet in length, and encloses a
beautiful area of fifteen acres.

The settlers state that in early times there were two stone mounds and
one stone circle, which contained such excellent building stone, that
they removed them for building purposes. They had to cut a way and
grade it, to remove the stones, which those rude architects of early
prehistoric times found no difficulty in taking from a distant quarry
to that high elevation. We must therefore agree that their knowledge
of the mechanical powers was far superior to anything the Indian race
has shown.

About the largest fortification in Ohio may be seen at Bournville. It
encloses a magnificent area of fertility, on an elevation of 400 feet.
The sides are remarkably steep, and are washed by small creeks, that
empty into Paint Creek hard by. Within the fortification are several
depressions, where water remains most of the year. The area, of
itself, would be a beautiful farm, as it consists of 140 acres. The
wall, which was about 2-1/4 miles in length, is very much in ruins,
being chiefly built of stone. Some years ago the whole place was
covered by the trees, and on the dilapidated stone wall, may still be
seen immense trees, whose growth among the stones helped to displace
them. The decayed wood beneath some of these trees indicates that
successions of forests have flourished since these forts were
abandoned by those who made them.


GRADED WAYS.--It is well known that, in most of these valleys; there
are several terraces, from the river bottom or flats, up to the high
lands in the distance. Near a place called Piketown there is a
beautiful graded avenue. The third terrace is seventeen feet above the
second and the second about fourteen feet from the river flat. These
terraces form, when graded, this avenue, which has walls on either
side in height twenty-two feet. These walls run for 1,010 feet to the
third terrace, where they continue to run for 2,580 feet, terminating
in a group of mounds one of which is thirty feet high. Some distance
from these walls another wall runs 212 feet at right angles, and then
turns parallel for 420 feet, when it curves inwardly for 240 feet.


MOUNDS.--I stated at the outset that the mounds in Ohio were very
numerous. They are of various sizes, ranging from those which are only
a few feet in height and a few yards at their base, to those which are
about 90 feet in height, and covering some acres at their base. These
mounds are mostly composed of earth, the material often differing
greatly from the surrounding soil. When we consider the multitudes of
these mounds, and the immense transportation of earth and stones
required in their structure, it needs no stretch of imagination to
conclude that the Mound-builders were a mighty race. Most of these
mounds are located near large rivers or streams, and, consequently, in
the valleys, although some few are to be found on high lands, and even
on hills very suitable for military purposes. Sometimes they may be
seen in clusters, indicating a great business centre and large
population, while again only one may be found in a journey of fifty or
one hundred miles.

During the last fifty years, these tumuli have been carefully
examined, and, from their contents, shape and position, they are now
classified as Temple or Sacrificial Mounds, Burial or Sepulchral
Mounds, Symbolic Mounds, Signal Mounds and Indefinite Mounds. I shall
briefly describe the characteristic of each class and give a few
examples.

_Temple Mounds_.--These mounds are not so numerous in Ohio as in some
other States, yet they occur in sufficient numbers to deserve a small
share of our attention. The city of Marietta has slowly encroached
upon some interesting remains of a sacrificial character, which
consist of two irregular squares containing 50 and 27 acres
respectively. They are situated on a level plain 100 feet above the
level of the Ohio and Muskingum Rivers. The smaller square has ten
gateways, which are covered by mounds, while the larger square, being
strictly a sacred enclosure, has no mounds to cover the 16 openings,
but contains nevertheless four temple mounds of considerable interest.
On the top of these mounds, doubtless there were erected capacious
temples, as there are significant avenues of ascent. There may still
be seen the remains of the ancient altar, where, without doubt, these
people assembled for worship, and where, from the presence of human
bones, we may conclude human beings were offered in sacrifice. In all
the sacred enclosures, evidences of altars have been found, on which,
doubtless, the sacrificial fires blazed for ages. Often are to be
found successions of alternate layers of ashes and blue clay,
indicating a desire for pure sacrifice.

In the neighborhood of Newark, Ohio, at the forks of Licking River,
may be seen most elaborate enclosures, square, circular, and polygonal
in their form, covering in all an extent of four square miles. Like
the ancient temples of the Druids, most of the enclosures have their
openings to the east, or rising sun, so that the first rays shall
strike the altar where doubtless a priest, from the early hour of
dawn, performed mysterious rites.

On the west, there is erected a mound, 170 feet long and 14 feet in
height, which overlooks the whole works, and has been styled "the
Observatory". To the east is a true circle 2,880 feet in
circumference, the wall being 6 feet in height. To the north of this
is an avenue leading from the circle to an octagon of fifty acres, in
the wall of which are eight gateways, which, however, are covered by
mounds five feet in height. From this strange eight-sided figure run
three parallel walls. Those to the south are about two miles in
length, and those running towards the east are each about one mile in
length.

About a mile east, where the middle line of parallel walls terminates,
is a square containing twenty acres, within and around the walls of
which are disposed seven mounds. To the north-east of this is an
elliptical work of large dimensions. On the south-east is a circle, in
the centre of which is the form of a bird with wings expanded. The
body is 155 feet, the length of each wing 110 feet, and the head of
the bird is towards the opening. When this structure was opened, there
was found an altar, proving that, in this circular place, this ancient
people must have assembled for worship.

There is a place three miles north of Chillicothe, where an extensive
enclosure--now called "Mound City"--contains 26 well formed and
regularly disposed mounds, covering an area of 13 acres. Many of those
mounds contained altars at their base, but have been subsequently
converted into ordinary mounds. One mound, which is 90 feet in
diameter at the base and 7-1/2 feet in height, contained an altar,
within the basin of which was found a layer of solid ashes three
inches thick, in which were numerous pieces of pottery and
shell-beads. On the top of the altar was a layer of sand, then gravel
for two feet, then a thin layer of sand, then one foot of gravel.

Buried three feet below the apex of the mound, were found two well
developed and highly preserved skeletons, which, however, were not
those of Mound-builders, but rather of the Indians who were buried
there long after the mounds were abandoned. One altar was covered by a
layer of opaque mica, which must have been brought from a great
distance. In the centre of the basin was found, besides numerous other
relics, a large heap of burned human bones, which would indicate it an
altar of human sacrifice. From other evidences, we may safely conclude
that they were Sun or Fire-worshippers. As to the cause of these
altars being afterwards changed into common mounds, it is difficult to
determine. Many such mounds are found, which for a long time were used
for purposes of sacrifice, and then covered over by many feet of
earth. We may not wonder, however, at this, as even now many old
churches are abandoned to the fate of being turned into dwelling
houses or barns.

It may be, however, that after the decease of the priest who performed
his sacred functions before the altar for many years, the people, to
whom he had so long ministered, laid, or burned his remains on the
altar which they so much revered, and then, like the ancient builders
of the pyramids, erected a monument to departed worth, and during the
strange ritual deposited beside the respected remains whatever
implements or ornaments they could part with, in honor of the dead.

_Burial Mounds_.--As in modern days, a place of sepulture is usually
selected some distance from the city or town, so the burial mounds may
be expected without the enclosures. In our own time we find some
cemeteries densely populated with graves, and others have but few. So
it was in the days of the Mound-builders; for we find in some places
groups of burial mounds, and in other places only a few may be found
scattered over the plain.

Burial mounds are of various sizes, I presume, according to the
dignity of the individual entombed. Sometimes one large mound is found
to possess a skeleton, and some interesting relics, which indicate the
position of the departed, while a group of smaller mounds is situated
around it. The large one perhaps contained the skeleton of a leader,
surrounded by a few of his intimate followers. Or perhaps it was that
of a patriarch, surrounded by his numerous progeny, much as, in our
own day, burial plots are set apart for families.

Grave Creek burial mound, which stands at the junction of Grave Creek,
Virginia, with the Ohio, is one of the largest and most important
burial mounds in America. It is 70 feet in height and at its base it
is 1,000 feet in circumference. When this mound was opened, two vaults
were found, one at the base contained two skeletons, one of them a
female. The logs of which this vault was composed were all decayed,
and the earth and stones lay upon the skeletons. In the upper vault
there was a single skeleton very much decayed. Within these vaults and
beside the illustrous dead, were found more than 3,000 shell-beads,
ornaments of mica, copper bracelets, and other stone carvings. Around
the lower vault were found ten much decayed skeletons, all in a
sitting posture.

The skeletons in the vaults, doubtless, were the remains of royalty,
or some distinguished chiefs, whose memory these devoted people
desired to perpetuate, while the ten skeletons, which surrounded the
vault, were perhaps some of their loyal subjects who were sacrificed
according to the custom of some of the heathen nations both ancient
and modern. Foster, desiring to draw a comparison or rather identify
this mode of burial with those of the Greeks and other nations,
directs our attention to Herodotus, Book IV, Chaps. 71 and 190. And
for identifying the ceremonial with the funeral of Achilles, our
attention is called to the Odyssey, Book XXIV, with the burial of
Hector in the Iliad, Book XXIV.

Dr. Wilson identifies the burial of the living with the dead by giving
an account of the burial of Black Bird, the great chief of the Omahas
more than 60 years ago. He caught the smallpox at Washington, and
dying on his way home, he gave instructions to his braves around him
how he was to be buried. "His body was clothed with the gayest Indian
robes, decorated with scalps and war eagle plumes, and he was carried
to one of the loftiest bluffs on the Missouri. He was placed upon his
favorite war horse, a beautiful white steed. His bow was placed in his
hand. His shield, quiver, pipe, medicine-bag and tobacco-pouch hung by
his side, for his comfort on his journey to the happy hunting grounds
of the great Manitou. After a significant ceremonial, the Indians
placed turf and sod about the legs of the horse; gradually the pile
rose, until living horse and dead rider were buried together in this
memorial mound, which may be seen from the banks of the Missouri."

But to come back to the mound, I now describe a sandstone disk, 1-1/2
inch in diameter and 3/4 inch thick, taken up from near the skeleton
in the lower part of Grave Creek mound. According to Schoolcraft's
analysis, communicated to the American Ethnological Society, "Of the
22 alphabetic characters, 4 correspond with the ancient Greek, 4 with
the Etruscan, 5 with the old Northern runes, 6 with the ancient
Gaelic, 7 with the old Erse, 10 with the Phoenician, 14 with the old
British," and he also adds that equivalents may be found in the old
Hebrew. It is, as some writers have described it, an exceedingly
accommodating inscription. The following readings have been given:--

By M. Levy Bing: "What thou sayest, thou dost impose it, thou shinest
in thy impetuous clan, and rapid chamois." By M. Maurice Schwab
(1857): "The chief of emigration who reached these places, has fixed
these statutes forever." By M. Oppert: "The grave of one who was
assassinated here. May God, to revenge him, strike his murderer,
cutting off the hand of his existence." We can only say of these
readings what a Hebrew Rabbi said to an indolent student, who in
reading a verse in the Psalms in the original, gave the translation of
the next verse, "Gentlemen, that is a very free translation." Besides
this, other readings have been given, all of which have the advantage
that few can contradict them.

In the Scioto valley, where there are many very interesting remains of
the Mound-builders, there are many burial mounds which have lately
been opened. In many of these, the casts of unhewn logs are still
visible, showing that the dead were placed in a rude vault, which was
afterwards covered by soil. One skeleton was found to have round the
neck several hundred beads, made mostly of marine shells, others made
of the tusks of animals and a few laminae of mica. In the same mound
from which this skeleton was taken, the vault gave strong evidence of
its having been set on fire during the burial ceremony,--the large
quantity of charcoal proving that it was suddenly quenched by the
fresh soil heaped upon it.

If these Mound-builders were Sun-worshippers, as may safely be
concluded from tablets and from rock markings, as well as from the
fact of their sacred enclosures mostly looking towards the east, where
the early rays would fall upon the altar, we may easily account for
the fire having a share In the burial ceremony. Some have concluded
that the blazing fire signified "life," and that the sudden quenching
signified "death."

Let it not be thought, however, that there are no burying places but
these few mounds. I believe the mounds of a burial character were only
for persons of distinction, while in reality there are thousands of
ancient cemeteries of vast extent, where multitudes have received
common burial. The spring freshets yearly uncover many of these,
exposing not only their bones, but many ornaments and implements that
were used by this wonderful people, and which were deposited beside
them when consigned to the silent tomb.

_Symbolic Mounds_.--There can be no mistake in affirming that the
strange mounds, so prevalent in Wisconsin, and frequently found in
other States, were the result of intention rather than accident. These
are sometimes called "Effigy Mounds." In Wisconsin, even implements,
as well as animals, are symbolized. The beaver, the tortoise, the
elephant, the serpent, the alligator seem to be their favorite
animals, whose images they have endeavored to perpetuate in mounds, of
course on a large scale. In Adams county, Ohio, on a steep bluff, 150
feet above the level of Brush Creek, may be seen a huge serpent.

It is called the "Serpent Mound." The head of the serpent lies towards
the point of the spur, and then like the serpent, its body winds
gracefully back for 700 feet, the tail curved into a triple coil. From
this and other evidences lately collected, we may assume that the
serpent was among the sacred animals. Between the jaws of this serpent
there is a stone mound, bearing marks of long use as an altar. The
body, which is a mere winding wall, is, on an average, five feet in
height, and thirty-feet broad at the base near the centre. Doubtless
this wall was much higher when first made, and owing to the rains of
centuries it has become lower and broader.

Another mound, the shape and proportion of an alligator, may be seen
in Licking county, Ohio, about one mile from Granville. This is also
on a spur of land near the Licking River. Its length is 250 feet and
height about four feet. Its whole outline is strictly conformable to
the alligator with which animal they must have been familiar along the
Mississippi, where they could easily journey by boat. Rather than
transport the animal from the south, they doubtless erected this
representation of what they must have held sacred.

In the State of Wisconsin there is one symbolic mound more worthy of
notice than any other. It is called "the Elephant Mound," from the
fact that it bears the proportion and conformability of the Mastodon.
This people must have known something of this animal which in early
times roamed over this continent. I think we should not be going too
far if we supposed that the Mound-builders lived contemporaneously
with the last of these monsters of the Prehistoric forests.

_Signal Mounds_.--It seems quite in keeping with what we have already
seen of the sagacity of this wonderful race, that they should erect
stations of observation in various suitable regions, so that signals
could be given to the multitudes who dwelt in the plain, when they
were threatened by an approaching enemy. If a fire were lit on a much
burnt mound at the ancient fort near Bournville, it could be seen over
a large portion of the valleys, where numerous works are found. No
doubt, this was a signal mound, where the appointed watchman, like the
watchman of Scripture, could give the alarm of the coming foe,
enabling the industrious people to reach the fortress in safety.

On a hill 600 feet high, near Chillicothe, Ohio, there is a mound,
which in the days of the Mound-builders must have been a signal mound.
A light on this can be seen for twenty miles either up or down the
valley.

The great mound at Miamisburg, Ohio, which is 68 feet high and 852
feet in circumference at its base, served, no doubt, this important
department of warfare, as a fire kindled on it could flash light into
Butler county, near Elk Creek, where it would again be taken up by the
watchman there, and light flashed in the direction of Xenia, and from
one signal mound to another until it would reach the great works at
Newark. Thus in the course of an hour the whole southern portion of
the State of Ohio could be warned of danger and prepare for combat or
shelter.

Such a system has been used by all nations, both civilized and savage.
We need not wonder that the Mound-builders with such sagacity and
forethought, should establish such a system of alarm by which the
inhabitants could be apprised of invasion.

_Indefinite Mounds_.--Of this class there are many. Thousands of such
indefinite mounds and squares and circles are to be seen scattered
over the various States of the Union. Their structure, composition and
contents, give us no clue by which they may be assigned a place. It is
believed that many of the strange works that abound in Butler county,
Ohio, and which cannot be classified, are among the incomplete works,
that is, works left unfinished by the builders.


IMPLEMENTS.--The people of Ohio have appropriated the implements of
the Mound-builders to a large extent. Almost every homestead in Ohio
is ornamented with some of those ancient implements and relics, yet
tons have been taken away to grace private and public museums in all
parts of this country, and even the museums of Europe and Asia. Among
the implements are to be found spear heads, arrow heads; rimmers,
knives, axes, hatchets, hammers, chisels, pestles, mortars, pottery,
pipes, sculpture, gorgets, tubes, and articles of bone and clothing.
Fragments of coarse, but uniformly spun and woven cloth have been
found, of course not in preservation, but charred and in folds. One
piece, near Middletown, Ohio, was found connected with tassels or
ornaments, and may be seen at the Smithsonian Institute at Washington.
In Anderson township, Ohio, native gold has been found for the first
time. Several small ornaments of copper have been found covered with
thin sheets of gold. Earrings also, made of meteoric iron, have been
found, and a serpent cut out of mica. Some terra-cotta figures also,
which give us an idea of the way the hair was dressed in the days of
the Mound-builders. I cannot here name all the implements and
ornaments that have been discovered. Though most of them are of hard
stone, yet many have been found made of copper.


MINING, ETC.--That these people were miners, is evident from the
prevalence of various mineral fragments and implements. At Mound City,
near Chillicothe, has been found galena, none of which can be found in
Ohio. Obsidian also is found in the shape of instruments, which they
must have transported from the Rocky Mountains. Ancient mining shafts
are found in Minnesota, where the solid rock had been excavated to the
depth of 60 feet. On Isle Royal there are pits 60 feet deep, worked
through nine feet of solid rock, at the bottom of which is a rich vein
of copper, and in the two miles of excavations in the same straight
line have been found the mining implements in great numbers. Such
advancement in mining, sagacity in warfare, industrial pursuits, and
geometric skill, as their works display, prove their great superiority
of race over the modern Indian. Their implements, some of them most
elaborately made, their brick-making and various other ingenious
works, enable us to place them high as an industrial people, while
their sacred enclosures, and altars, and tablets, together with the
numerous evidences of their being an agricultural nation, enable us to
place them far above the modern Indian in the scale of civilization.

The people of the United States, though much to be commended because
of their prudence and forethought in laying out their modern towns and
cities along the various water courses, which serve as the different
highways of commerce, have by no means shown a superior sagacity in
that respect to the Mound-builders, whose great centres of population
are now mostly occupied, or are encroached upon by the modern cities.

We may with safety assert that the population about Newark, and Xenia,
and Mound City, was far above what it is now. The country about
Dayton, Miamisburg, Oxford, Hamilton and Marietta was, undoubtedly, in
the days of the Mound-builders moving with a greater mass of human
beings than it can boast of to-day.

And if those peaceable and industrious inhabitants were as numerous as
their remains indicate, what must have been the strength of those
invading hordes who caused their downfall and perhaps wiped out
forever every living representative of that ancient race, who could
leave no more lasting memorial of their existence and struggles than
those mysterious mounds which have given them their name.


ANTIQUITY OF THE MOUND-BUILDERS.--Upon this point there are many
theories, some regarding them as the earliest of the Indian tribes.
Others give them a very great age and claim them to belong to
preadamite man. By far the greater number of archaeologists, however,
place their existence at about 2,000 years ago.

In favor of the latter view we may call as evidence the present forest
trees, which, though of great age, still flourish on some of the
ancient remains. On one of the mounds at Marietta, Ohio, there stood a
gigantic tree, which, when cut down, displayed 800 rings of annual
growth. In many other places, trees of the age of 750 years have been
cut, and underneath them evidences of previous forests found. One tree
750 years old was found to have underneath it, on the walls of one of
the forts in Ohio, the cast of another tree of equal size, which would
carry us back at least 1,500 years since those trees began to grow on
those deserted walls of that ancient fortification.

We have some data in the vegetable accumulations in the ancient mining
shafts near Lake Superior, as well as in the vegetable and other
matter deposited in the numerous pits and trenches found among the
works. Though these evidences cannot give the exact time of their
accumulation, yet they give it approximately, by comparison with
similar recent deposits.

There is another still stronger argument in favor of their antiquity,
viz., the decayed condition of the skeletons. The skeletons of the
oldest Indian tribes are comparatively sound while those of the
Mound-builders are much decayed. If they are sound when brought out,
they at once begin to disintegrate in the atmosphere, which is a sure
sign of their antiquity. We know that some skeletons in Europe have
lately been exhumed, which, though buried more than 1,000 years, are
comparatively firm and well-preserved. We are, I think, bound to
ascribe a greater antiquity to the Mound-builders' skeletons than to
those found in the ancient barrows of Europe. Other considerations,
such as stream encroachment, and river-terrace formation, might also
be brought in as presumptive arguments in favor of their great
antiquity.


ORIGIN OF THE MOUND-BUILDERS.--This is a question not easily answered.
It brings me into no discredit before the educated world to
acknowledge ignorance on this mysterious point. The study of
Craniology and Philology, in connection with Ethnology, shall alone
throw light on this subject. Dr. Wilson says, in his "Prehistoric Man"
(p. 123), "The ethnical classification of this strange race is still
an unsettled question," and he declares without fear of contradiction,
"that especially concerning the Scioto Mound skull, the elevation and
breadth of the frontal bone, differs essentially from the Indian, and
that the cerebral development was more in accordance with the
character of that singular people, who without architecture have
perpetuated, in mere structures of earth, the evidences of geometric
skill, a definite means of determining angles, a fixed standard of
measurement, and the capacity as well as the practice of repeating
geometrically constructed works of large and uniform dimensions."

Undoubtedly they were skilled in agriculture, from the remains of
ancient garden-beds, which were cultivated in a methodical manner. The
modern Indians give no such evidence of labor. For wherever they are
found they love to roam in undisputed possession of the forest, and
lead an indolent life. Of course I do not assign this as a valid
reason for their not being identified with the Mound-builders. An
ancient race may have a degenerate offspring.

Nor shall I attempt to find in the various inscriptions any clue to
their Hebrew origin, or to identify that ancient people with the lost
tribes, as some have dared to do. Foster inclines to regard them as
emigrating from the tropics, rather than coming from the north.

This would involve us in investigating the antiquity of the Mexican
and Peruvian ruins, where vast works of high architecture and more
advanced civilization were found than among the Mound-builders. There
is little difficulty in concluding that the Aztecs, who occupied
Mexico during the Spanish invasion under Cortez, were the conquerors
of several races that preceded them. Among these conquered races, no
doubt, were the Toltecs, who were afterwards found in such great
numbers, and in an amazing state of advanced civilization. The crania
of the Mound-builders and the Toltecs correspond. Now, whether they
migrated to the north from the tropics, or journeyed south from the
north, I cannot say. I should incline to the latter theory. Industry
is sure to advance. The rude mounds of the United States are far
surpassed by those immense pyramids in Mexico and Peru, surpassing the
Egyptian in size. And those fine architectural palaces and temples,
whose history we cannot fully know, far eclipse anything in the
northern part of America.

Whoever they were and wherever they came from, they were doubtless
driven southward by the invading tribes of the north. They nobly
fought their way, contesting every foot, until superior numbers took
them by force. Thus these quiet and inoffensive creatures were finally
expelled from their home which doubtless their fathers had occupied
through centuries. If any escaped they, no doubt, found an asylum
southward, where there were other tribes equally civilized, and,
forming an union with them or conquered by them, they began a higher
and better civilization as seen in Mexico and Peru.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Page 8: Octogon has been changed to octagon.

Page 15: Smithsonion has been changed to Smithsonian.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Mound-Builders, by William J. Smyth

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MOUND-BUILDERS ***

***** This file should be named 17969.txt or 17969.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/7/9/6/17969/

Produced by Thierry Alberto, Diane Monico, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net. (This file was produced from images
generously made available by the Canadian Institute for
Historical Microreproductions (www.canadiana.org).)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

