The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Song of our Syrian Guest, by William
Allen Knight


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: The Song of our Syrian Guest

Author: William Allen Knight

Release Date: June 14, 2004  [eBook #12615]

Language: English

Character set encoding: US-ASCII


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SONG OF OUR SYRIAN GUEST***


E-text prepared by Al Haines



The Song of our Syrian Guest

by

William Allen Knight

Illustrations and Decorative Designs by Charles Copeland

1904







  Psalm XXIII

  The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want.
  He maketh me to lie down in green pastures:
    he leadeth me beside the still waters.
  He restoreth my soul:
    he leadeth me in the paths of righteousness
    for his name's sake.
  Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death,
  I will fear no evil: for thou art with me;
    thy rod and thy staff they comfort me.
  Thou preparest a table before me in the presence
    of mine enemies;
    thou anointest my head with oil; my cup runneth over.
  Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me
    all the days of my life: and I will dwell
    in the house of the Lord for ever.




To the hand that held the tea-ball
and the faces of two little maids




Salutation

Three months have gone by since this little child of my heart went
out into the world, a strayling in the scanty dress of a booklet.
In that time many thousands have looked kindly on the little
wanderer and welcomed it into their homes.  Letters from everywhere
have come in, saying in effect: "It came to my door yesterday, and
its voice has been sweet to me, and I am glad to have it stay with
me."  For all this I am most thankful.  But it is hard to realize
that the small circle of those who loved this story a few months
ago has grown now to a multitude.

Surely none of us ought to be surprised that our story has itself
grown under all this kindness, after the manner of children.
Indeed, as we are sending it forth newly clothed, I find that it is
larger by half than when I last prepared it for journeying.

I am set to wondering whether it will not grow quite away from me
and have a life of its own.  Healthy children do that very thing
usually, and wise parents are willing to have it so.

But I cannot cease to remember that this story is out of my own
life.  It lay in my heart unborn for long.  It came forth in a time
of shock and pain.  There is One who knows why its face is unmarred
and bright with the gladness of trust.  I think God has let it
speak to so many hearts for this reason.

Go then, little story; be bearer of thy message of cheer and glad
restfulness.  I cannot follow thee into lives that need to hear thy
voice; but speak thou to them, and I shall be content.

Yet I know, friends of mine, that as you look up somewhere in the
world from these pages, you will want to ask me a question.

It has been asked and answered many times already.  Because I know
some of you are in sick-rooms, some are lonely and some companioned
by grief, some are poor and some for the time are misunderstood,
some are discouraged and some feel themselves little loved, some
are young and cannot find their way, and some are old and
wayworn,--because I know all of you have need of the Shepherd's
watch, I want to answer your question.  Yes, we did indeed have
such a guest, a man whose home was among the Syrian shepherds, a
man who well knew the life which rightly interprets the Shepherd
Psalm.

I give my word that this story's message about the Psalm's meaning
is straight from David's land.  We had such a guest and he told us
these things out of the life of his people, as we sat together one
night over fragrant cups of tea.

W. A. K.

Boston, January, 1904.




Can there be anything more poetic than this life of the Syrian
shepherd?  It ought to be religious, too.  Far, far away, out on
the lone mountain, with the everlasting hills around, and heaven
above, pure, blue, and high, and still.  There go and worship in
solemn silence and soul-subduing solitude, worship the Most High
God in his temple not made with hands.

And now the lights are out in the village, the shepherds are asleep
by the side of their flocks, the tinkling bell from the fold falls
faintly on the still night air, and the watch-dog bays drowsily
from his kennel at the gate.  Good night, fair world; 'tis time to
seek repose.  Let us first read and meditate upon that delightful
chapter, the tenth of St. John, where our blessed Saviour
appropriates all these characters of a good shepherd to himself.

"The Land and the Book."




"Faduel Moghabghab," said our guest, laughing as he leaned over the
tea-table toward two little maids, vainly trying to beguile their
willing and sweetly puckered lips into pronouncing his name.
"Faduel Moghabghab," he repeated in syllables, pointing to the card
he had passed to them.  "Accent the u and drop those g's which your
little throats cannot manage," he went on kindly, while the
merriment sparkled in his dark eyes, and his milk-white teeth, seen
through his black moustache as he laughed, added beauty to his
delicate and vivacious face.

He was a man of winsome mind, this Syrian guest of ours, and the
spirituality of his culture was as marked as the refinement of his
manners.  We shall long remember him for the tales told that
evening of his home in Ainzehalta on the slope of the Syrian
mountains, but longest of all for what he said out of the memories
of his youth about a shepherd song.

"It was out of the shepherd life of my country," he remarked, "that
there came long ago that sweetest religious song ever written--the
Twenty-third Psalm."

After the ripple of his merriment with the children had passed he
turned to me with a face now serious and pensive, and said: "Ah, so
many things familiar to us are strange to you of America."

"Yes," I answered, "and no doubt because of this we often make
mistakes which are more serious than mispronunciation of your
modern names."

He smiled pleasantly, then with earnestness said: "So many things
in the life of my people, the same now as in the days of old, have
been woven into the words of the Bible and into the conceptions of
religious ideas as expressed there; you of the Western world, not
knowing these things as they are, often misunderstand what is
written, or at least fail to get a correct impression from it."

"Tell us about some of these," I ventured, with a parental glance
at two listening little faces.

After mentioning several instances, he went on: "And there is the
shepherd psalm: I find that it is taken among you as having two
parts, the first under the figure of shepherd life, the second
turning to the figure of a banquet with the host and the guest."

"Oh, we have talked about that," said my lady of the teacups as she
dangled the tea-ball with a connoisseur's fondness, "and we have
even said that we wished the wonderful little psalm could have been
finished in the one figure of shepherd life."

"It seems to us," I added, wishing to give suitable support to my
lady's rather brave declaration of our sense of a literary flaw in
the matchless psalm, "it seems to us to lose the sweet, simple
melody and to close with strange, heavy chords when it changes to a
scene of banquet hospitality.  Do you mean that it actually keeps
the shepherd figure to the end?"

"Certainly, good friends."

With keen personal interest I asked him to tell us how we might see
it as a shepherd psalm throughout.  So we listened and he talked,
over the cooling teacups.

"It is all, all a simple shepherd psalm," he began.  "See how it
runs through the round of shepherd life from first word to last."

"With softly modulated voice that had the rhythm of music and the
hush of veneration in it, he quoted: "'_The Lord is my shepherd; I
shall not want_.'"

"There is the opening strain of its music; in that chord is sounded
the keynote which is never lost till the plaintive melody dies away
at the song's end.  All that follows is that thought put in varying
light."

I wish it were possible to reproduce here the light in his face and
the interchange of tones in his mellow voice as he went on.  He
talked of how the varied needs of the sheep and the many-sided care
of the shepherd are pictured with masterly touch in the short
sentences of the psalm.

"Each is distinct and adds something too precious to be merged and
lost," he said.

"'_He maketh me to lie down in green pastures_,'--nourishment,
rest.  '_He leadeth me beside the still waters_,'--the scene
changes and so does the meaning.  You think here of quietly flowing
streams; so you get one more picture of rest; but you miss one of
the finest scenes in shepherd life and one of the rarest blessings
of the soul that is led of God.  All through the day's roaming the
shepherd keeps one thing in mind.  He must lead his flock to a
drinking-place.  The refreshment of good water makes the coveted
hour of all the day; the spot where it is found amid the rough,
waterless hills and plains is the crowning token of the shepherd's
unfailing thoughtfulness.  When at last the sheep are led 'beside
the still waters,' how good it is, after the dust and heat of the
sheep-walks!

"Would you get the shepherd meaning here?  Then remember that
streams are few in the shepherd country of Bible lands.  The
shepherds do not rely on them.  Even where streams are found, their
beds and banks are usually broken and their flow rough.  Sheep are
timid and fear a current of water, as they well may for they are
easily carried down stream because of their wool."

"Poor things, how do they ever get a good drink?" exclaimed one of
the two little maids, whose heart was always open lovingly  to
animals.

"The shepherd sees to that, doesn't he?" said the other timidly,
with earnest eyes set on our guest.

His face beamed with winsome relish of these tributes to his
success.  "Yes, the sheep would indeed have a hard time finding
water to drink, were it not that the shepherd sees to that."

The playfulness faded from his eyes and the shadow of manhood's
years was there as he said to me: "Brother, you and I have learned
how much is in that question and answer.  How would we get the
refreshment we need in the rough world, if the Shepherd did not see
to that?  But he does, he does!"

His face brightened again as he turned to the four blue eyes across
the table.

"Shall I tell you how the shepherd sees to it that the sheep have a
good drink every day?  Listen:

"There are wells and fountains all through the vast regions where
the flocks roam, and in some parts there are cisterns, though the
sheep like the living water best.  The shepherds know where these
drinking-places are all through the treeless country where streams
are few.  It is a fine sight to see the shepherds bring their
flocks '_beside the still waters_' at some well or fountain, while
the wide, silent country over which they and many other sheep have
wandered, spreads all around them, and the full expanse of the sky
arches over them.

"The shepherd makes a certain sound; all his sheep lie down and are
quiet.  Then he fills the drinking-troughs.  The bubbling of the
fountain, or the current, if it be by a stream, is no longer there
to trouble the sheep.  They can drink now undisturbed.  This is the
delicate meaning of that word 'still.'  As the Hebrew words put it,
'He leadeth beside the waters of quietness.'

"Then the waiting sheep hear a whistle or a call.  They never
misunderstand; they know their shepherd's voice and never respond
to the wrong shepherd if several flocks have come up together.  And
strangest of all, the sheep come up by groups; the shepherd makes
them understand.  So in groups he leads them until they stand
'_beside the still waters_.'  And, oh, how they drink, with the
shepherd standing near!"

After a pause, with a far-off look in his eyes, he said, "It is a
beautiful scene, so beautiful that St. John has used it in
picturing heaven."  A smile broke over his face as he quoted: "'The
Lamb that is in the midst of the throne shall be their shepherd,
and shall guide them unto fountains of waters of life.'"

No one spoke as he sat turning his teacup.  A tear started from his
dropped eyes.  Presently he seemed to recall himself.

"But I must tell you one more scene that comes to my memory
whenever I read the words, 'he leadeth me beside the still
waters_.'  It would make a beautiful picture if some one would
paint it.

"Up in the mountainsides of Lebanon, where my kinsmen have long
been shepherds, often there are no regular drinking-places, such as
the wells and fountains on the plains.  But as the shepherd leads
his sheep over the rough slopes he finds many a spring and sees its
rivulet noisily down a crevice.  His sheep need water.  They cannot
drink from the leaping little stream.  What does he do?  He finds a
suitable turn or nook in its course; he walls it up with a little
dam and so holds the water till it forms a quiet pool.  Then, right
there on the open hills, he leads his sheep 'beside the still
waters_.'  I know of nothing more fit to picture the Shepherd's
care of souls that trust him than that scene up there on the
mountainside."

While our thoughts were carried away to these scenes of thirsty
flocks drinking, I chanced to notice that the tea-ball was again
quietly at work.  As we sat thinking on that picture up in the
mountain, a good hand offered our guest a fresh cup.  He received
it with a low bow, sipped it in quiet, then with a grateful smile
began speaking again:

"'_He restoreth my soul_.'  You know," he said, turning to me,
"that soul means the life or one's self in the Hebrew writings."

Then addressing us all he went on: "There are perilous places for
the sheep on all sides, and they seem never to learn to avoid them.
The shepherd must ever be on the watch.  And there are private
fields and sometimes gardens and vineyards here and there in the
shepherd country; if the sheep stray into them and be caught there
it is forfeited to the owner of the land.  So, 'he restoreth my
soul' means, 'The shepherd brings me back and rescues me from fatal
and forbidden places.'"

"'Restores me when wandering,' is the way it is put in one of our
hymns," I interposed.

"Ah, sir, that is it exactly," he answered, "'restores me when
wandering!'

"'_He leadeth me in the paths of righteousness for his name's
sake.'  Often have I roamed through the shepherd country in my
youth and seen how hard it is to choose the right path for the
sheep; one leads to a precipice, another to a place where the sheep
cannot find the way back; and the shepherd was always going ahead,
'leading' them in the right paths, proud of his good name as a
shepherd.

"Some paths that are right paths still lead through places that
have deadly perils.  '_Yea, though I walk through the valley of the
shadow of death_,' is the way the psalm touches this fact in
shepherd life.  This way of naming the valley is very true to our
country.  I remember one near my home called 'the valley of
robbers,' and another, 'the ravine of the raven.'  You see 'the
valley of the shadow of death' is a name drawn from my country's
old custom.

"'For thou art with me.'  Ah, how could more be put into few words!
With the sheep, it matters not what the surroundings are, nor how
great the perils and hardships; if only the shepherd is with them,
they are content.  There is no finer picture of the way of peace
for the troubled in all the world.

"To show how much the presence of the shepherd counts for the
welfare of the sheep I can think of nothing better than the strange
thing I now tell you.  It is quite beyond the usual, daily care on
which the flock depends so fondly.  But I have seen it more than
once.

"Sometimes, in spite of all the care of the shepherd and his dogs,
a wolf will get into the very midst of the flock.  The sheep are
wild with fright.  They run and leap and make it impossible to get
at the foe in their midst, who at that very moment may be fastening
his teeth in the throat of a helpless member of the flock.  But the
shepherd is with them.  He knows what to do even at such a time.
He leaps to a rock or hillock that he may be seen and heard.   Then
he lifts his voice in a long call, something like a wolf's cry:
'Ooh! ooh!'

"On hearing this, the sheep remember the shepherd; they heed his
voice; and, strange to tell, the poor, timid creatures, which were
helpless with terror before, instantly rush with all their strength
into a solid mass.  The pressure is irresistible; the wolf is
overcome; frequently he is crushed to death, while the shepherd
stands there on a rock crying, 'Ooh! ooh!'  '_I will fear no evil:
for art with me_.'"

He paused, looking questioningly at one and another.

"Yes," I said at last, "'in all these things we are more than
conquerors through him that loved us.'"  He bowed his satisfaction
in silence.

"'_Thy rod and thy staff_'--this also is true to life; the double
expression covers the whole round of protecting care.  For the
shepherds carry a crook for guiding the sheep and a weapon suitable
for defending them, the rod and the staff; one for aiding them in
places of need along peaceful ways, the other for defense in perils
of robbers and wild beasts.  This saying describes with the ease of
mastery how much those words mean, '_Thou art with me_.'

"And what shall I say of the next words, '_Thy rod and thy staff
they comfort me_'?  Ah, madam, you should see the sheep cuddle near
the shepherd to understand that word, '_They comfort me_.' The
shepherd's call 'Ta-a-a-a, ho-o-o,' and the answering patter of
feet as the sheep hurry to him, are fit sounds to be chosen out of
the noisy world to show what comfort God gives to souls that heed
his voice; and those sounds have been heard in my country this day
as they were the day this shepherd psalm was written!"

He sat in silence a moment musing as if the sound were in his ear.

With quiet animation he lifted his thin hand and continued: "Now
here is where you drop the shepherd figure and put in a banquet and
so lose the fine climax of completeness in the shepherd's care."

It need not be said that we were eager listeners now, for our guest
was all aglow with memories of his far-off homeland and we felt
that we were about to see new rays of light flash from this rarest
gem in the song-treasury of the world.

"'_Thou preparest a table before me in the presence of mine
enemies_.'"  In the same hushed voice in which he quoted these
words he added: "Ah, to think that the shepherd's highest skill and
heroism should be lost from view as the psalm begins to sing of it,
and only an indoor banquet thought of!"  Again he sat a little time
in quiet.  Then he said:

"The word for table here means simply 'something spread out' and so
a prepared meal, however it is set forth.  There is no higher task
of the shepherd in my country than to go from time to time to study
places and examine the grass and find a good and safe feeding-place
for his sheep.  All his skill and often great heroism are called
for.  There are many poisonous plants in the grass and the shepherd
must find and avoid them.  The sheep will not eat certain poisonous
things, but there are some which they will eat, one kind of
poisonous grass in particular.  A cousin of mine once lost three
hundred sheep by a mistake in this hard task.

"Then there are snake holes in some kinds of ground, and, if they
be not driven away, the snakes bite the noses of the sheep.  The
shepherd sometimes burns the fat of hogs along the ground to do
this.  Sometimes the shepherd finds ground where moles have worked
their holes just under the surface.  Snakes lie in these holes with
their heads sticking up ready to bite the grazing sheep.  The
shepherds know how to drive them away as they go along ahead of the
sheep.

"And around the feeding-ground which the shepherd thus prepares, in
holes and caves in the hillsides there are jackals, wolves, hyenas,
and panthers, too, and the bravery and skill of the shepherd are at
the highest point in closing up these dens with stones or slaying
the wild beasts with his long-bladed knife.  Of nothing do you hear
shepherds boasting more proudly than of their achievements in this
part of their care of flocks.

"And now," he exclaimed with a beaming countenance and suppressed
feeling, as if pleading for recognition of the lone shepherd's
bravest act of devotion to his sheep, "and now do you not see the
shepherd figure in that quaint line, '_Thou preparest a table
before me in the presence of mine enemies_'?"

"Yes," I answered; "and I see that God's care of a man out in the
world is a grander thought than that of seating him at an indoor
banquet-table."

"But what about anointing the head with oil and the cup running
over?  Go on, my friend."

"Oh, there begins the beautiful picture at the end of the day.  The
psalm has sung of the whole round of the day's wandering, all the
needs of the sheep, all the care of the shepherd.  Now the psalm
closes with the last scene of the day.  At the door, of the
sheepfold the shepherd stands and 'the rodding of the sheep' takes
place.  The shepherd stands, turning his body to let the sheep
pass; he is the door, as Christ said of himself.  With his rod he
holds back the sheep while he inspects them one by, one as they
pass into the fold.  He has the horn filled with olive-oil and he
has cedar-tar, and he anoints a knee bruised on the rocks or a side
scratched by thorns.  And here comes one that is not bruised but is
simply worn and exhausted; he bathes its face and head with the
refreshing olive-oil and he takes the large two-handled cup and
dips it brimming full from the vessel of water provided for that
purpose, and he lets the weary sheep drink.

"There is nothing finer in the psalm than this.  God's care is not
for the wounded only, but for the worn and weary also.  '_Thou
anointest my head with oil; my cup runneth over_.'

"And then, when the day is done and the sheep are snug within the
fold, what contentment, what rest under the starry sky!  Then comes
the thought of deepest repose and comfort: '_Surely goodness and
mercy shall follow me all the days of my life_,' as they have
through all the wanderings of the day now ended.

"The song dies away as the heart that God has watched and tended
breathes this grateful vow before the roaming of the day is
forgotten in sleep: '_I will_--not shall, but will; for it is a
decision, a settled purpose, a holy vow--'I will dwell in the house
of the Lord for ever_.'  And the song ends, and the sheep are at
rest, safe in the good shepherd's fold."

Do you wonder that ever since that night we have called this psalm
The Song of Our Syrian Guest?




Sidelights


Shepherd Life in Bible Lands

PROFESSOR GEORGE E. POST

The American College, Bayrout, Syria

"The same regions which furnished the vast flocks in ancient times
are still noted for their sheep.  All the plateaus east of the
Jordan and the mountains of Palestine and Syria are pasture-grounds
for innumerable flocks and herds.  They require water but once a
day, and, where they cannot get it from perennial streams, they
find it in the innumerable wells, fountains and cisterns.  The
descendants of the same shepherds who tended flocks in Bible days
still occupy the great sheepwalks of Palestine.

"The care of sheep is the subject of frequent allusion in
Scripture.  The shepherd leads (not drives) them to pasture and
water (Ps. 23; 77:20; 78:52; 80:1); protects them at the risk of
his life (John 10:15).  To keep them from the cold and rain and
beasts, he collects them in caves (1 Sam. 24:3) or enclosures built
of rough stones (Num. 32:16; Judg. 5:16; Zeph. 2:6; John 10:1).
The sheep know their shepherd, and heed his voice (John 10:4).  It
is one of the most interesting spectacles to see a number of flocks
of thirsty sheep brought by their several shepherds to be watered
at a fountain.  Each flock, in obedience to the call of its own
shepherd, lies down, awaiting its turn.  The shepherd of one flock
calls his sheep in squads, draws water for them, pours it into the
troughs, and, when the squad has done, orders it away by sounds
which the sheep perfectly understand, and calls up another squad.
When the whole of one flock is watered, its shepherd signals to it,
and the sheep rise and move leisurely away, while another flock
comes in a similar manner to the troughs, and so on, until all the
flocks are watered.  The sheep never make any mistake as to who
whistles to them or calls to them.  'They know not the voice of
strangers' (John 10:5).  Sometimes they are called by names (John
10:3).  Syrian sheep are usually white (Ps. 147:16; Isa. 1:18; Dan.
7:9), but some are brown (Gen. 30:32-42; Revised Version 'black').
No animal mentioned in Scripture compares in symbolical interest
and importance with the sheep.   It is alluded to about five
hundred times."




The Singing Pilgrim

A CHARACTERIZATION OF THE TWENTY-THIRD PSALM

HENRY WARD BEECHER

"The Twenty-third Psalm is the nightingale of the psalms.  It is
small, of a homely feather, singing shyly out of obscurity; but,
oh, it has filled the air of the whole world with melodious joy,
greater than the heart can conceive!  Blessed be the day on which
that psalm was born!

"What would you say of a pilgrim commissioned of God to travel up
and down the earth singing a strange melody, which, when once
heard, caused him to forget whatever sorrow he had?  And so the
singing angel goes on his way through all lands, singing in the
language of every nation, driving away trouble by the pulses of the
air which his tongue moves with divine power.  Behold just such an
one!  This pilgrim God has sent to speak in every language on the
globe.  It has charmed more griefs to rest than all the philosophy
of the world.  It has remanded to their dungeon more felon
thoughts, more black doubts, more thieving sorrows, than there are
sands on the seashore.  It has comforted the noble host of the
poor.  It has sung courage to the army of the disappointed.  It has
poured balm and consolation into the heart of the sick, of captives
in dungeons, of widows in their pinching griefs, of orphans in
their loneliness.  Dying soldiers have died easier as it was read
to them; ghastly hospitals have been illuminated; it has visited
the prisoner and broken his chains, and, like Peter's angel, led
him forth in imagination, and sung him back to his home again.  It
has made the dying Christian slave freer than his master, and
consoled those whom, dying, he left behind, mourning not so much
that he was gone as because they were left behind and could not go
too.

"Nor is its work done.  It will go on singing to your children and
my children, and to their children, through all the generations of
time; nor will it fold its wings till the last pilgrim is safe, and
time ended; and then it shall fly back to the bosom of God, whence
it issued, and sound on, mingled with all those sounds of celestial
joy which make heaven musical forever."



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SONG OF OUR SYRIAN GUEST***


******* This file should be named 12615.txt or 12615.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.net/1/2/6/1/12615


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

http://gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***
