The Project Gutenberg eBook, Legend of Moulin Huet, by Lizzie A. Freeth


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: Legend of Moulin Huet

Author: Lizzie A. Freeth

Release Date: November 22, 2004  [eBook #14118]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LEGEND OF MOULIN HUET***


E-text prepared by Steven Gibbs and the Project Gutenberg Online
Distributed Proofreading Team



LEGEND OF MOULIN HUET

by

LIZZIE A. FREETH

Author Of _The Adventures of Carl Skinflint among the Fairies_

Guernsey: Le Lievre, Printer, Star-Office,
10, Bordage Street.

1872







     DEDICATED TO
     "THE CONWAY BOYS."





DEDICATION.


Though the story contained in the following pages has no connection with
them, yet it is my wish to dedicate this little work to "The Conway
Boys," and all those connected with that most invaluable institution,
"H.M.S. Conway," lying at Rockferry, Birkenhead.

I have particular reason to speak well of the "Conway," as any "Boy" may
know who may have been on board for the last five or six years, from the
fact that two of my brothers, after passing a successful career under
the careful teaching of the Rev. Henry O'Brien; L.L.D., Cork, continued
to build on the good foundation laid, and left the "Conway" with credit
both to their teachers and themselves. I shall always have pleasure in
meeting with any "Conway Boy," and hearing of the good old ship to which
I wish a long continuance of her success in preparing Boys creditably
for one of the great sources of our national strength and wealth--"Our
Merchant Navy."

I must just add a word of thanks to my friends in Guernsey and
elsewhere, who so kindly encouraged and supported me when publishing on
a former occasion, and whom I see, by reference to the subscription
list, coming forward again--among some new friends--with a repetition of
their kindness.

Montpelier, Guernsey, 1872.




CHAPTER I.


In the year 165-, when Cromwell had gained ascendancy in England and
over the greater portion of the Channel Islands, there lived in
Guernsey, at the Bay of Moulin Huet, a miller of the name of Pierre
Moullin. Unlike his class generally, he was a very morose man, hard in
his dealings with the poor around him, and exceedingly unsympathizing in
all his domestic relations, as will appear as our story unwinds itself.
Before speaking of the family surroundings of Pierre Moullin we will
glance at the circumstance which forms the basis of the present tale.
Visitors to the Bay of Moulin Huet, as well as to other parts of this
and the surrounding Islands, may have observed a crimson appearance on
the rocks, suggesting very sanguinary ideas, but for which, geologists
doubtless, would be able to account in a very satisfactory manner.
Looking at a portion of the original gully through which the water runs
after passing through the mill wheel, we find that this crimson
appearance is very visible, and as our purpose is not to raise
scientific enquiries, we will take one of the fanciful reasons (of which
there are two or three in existence), for this coloring on by the hand
of Nature, which has so abundantly bedecked Guernsey in general, and
Moulin Huet in particular. Dipping into the Fairy lore of that part of
the island, we find that many believe that some mischievous Fairies who
annoyed the miller much with their nightly pranks were ground to pieces
by the mill wheel becoming unfastened, and that their blood remains
there to this day, as a warning to all others among the "good people"
who might wish to vent their superfluous mischief in a like manner.

So much for the Fairy lore in the Moulin Huet Chronicles; but we must
turn our attention elsewhere to find out whose blood it was that thus
dyed the watercourse of the Moulin Huet Mill.

At the time of which we are speaking, (the opening of the year 165-)
Pierre Moullin and his two children, a son and a daughter, lived in a
house adjoining the mill, in fact, the same roof covered both mill and
house, which were built facing the sea. The stream of water which turned
the wheel was far more powerful than the present, as the old marks
(still partially visible) denote. Pierre Moullin, like many of his
fellow-islanders, was a strong adherent of Cromwell; his son Hirzel was
also,--though perhaps he did not go quite as far as his father in his
hatred of the Royalist party. He had nevertheless acquaintances among
the Royalist soldiers who were quartered in the strong fortress at
Jerbourg. One in particular he had made a great friend of--Charlie
Heyward. Old Pierre often used to say he knew harm would come of this
friendship, and felt his words were being proved true when he
discovered that an attachment was springing up between his daughter
Marguerite and the young soldier. On becoming aware of this his rage was
unbounded, and he repeatedly said he would be the death of Charlie if he
could manage it. He tried in every way to bring his son to his way of
thinking, but though Hirzel did not much like the idea of his sister
marrying a Royalist soldier, and besides which another friend and
fellow-countryman of his Jacques Gaultier, was also much attached to the
fair Marguerite, and had long persecuted her with his unwelcome
attentions, still Hirzel would have done anything rather than have
injured his friend Charlie, whom he liked well, though he did not like
his principles. In Jacques Gaultier the old miller saw a ready tool
towards gaining his wicked end of destroying Charlie. The latter did not
think Pierre's hatred reached the extent it did, at the same time he was
still aware there was no chance of his ever gaining the old man's
consent to his marrying Marguerite.

One night Pierre sent his son to bring Jacques Gaultier saying, he
wished to speak to him about taking some flour into the town next day.
Jacques was only too delighted to get any excuse for going to the mill,
and immediately said he would accompany Hirzel if he "would wait until
he got something which he had been making for Marguerite."

"All right, Jacques, my boy, but look sharp, as the old man seems
impatient to-night."

"Thy tone and way of speaking savour far more of the style of that base
soldiery which our island is burdened with, than the tone of thy
father's son should be," replied Jacques.

"Very well," said Hirzel, "I will promise to mend my ways, but do be
quick, as I promised to walk with my sister at seven, and now it is nigh
on half-past; and she says she needs my counsel much on a matter."

"Ah! thou art an impatient lad, but it would be worse with me were I in
thy case; long till she'd ask me to walk with her, not I warrant were I
dying for a look at her sweet face."

"Don't be down-hearted, Jacques, how know'st thou but that my sister
may change her mind and look kindly on thee yet; wait till the Redcoats
have gone down to the Castle, and then perhaps thy fishers' garb may
find favour in her sight, but what hast thou got there? Some woman's
trifles, which thou seem'st to understand better than I have yet
learned."

"I made these sore against my will, for I would rather see thy sister
reading some edifying book than passing her time on such vanities as
these are used for, they are bobbins, lad."

"Ha, Ha," laughed Hirzel, "were I to go into the market to-morrow and
say that stern Jacques Gaultier spent his hours carving out lace
bobbins, who would believe me?"

"Don't laugh at me, Hirzel, perhaps one of these fine days thou wilt do
something more foolish: when thy nineteen summers shall have ripened
like mine to thirty thou wilt have different thoughts."

"Time enough to speak when it comes. Now I love my boat better than
anything else! But how we are wasting this fine evening. My Father will
think we are lost or gone to be soldiers, eh Jacques? Come along, and we
will see what Marguerite thinks of those little sticks of thine."




CHAPTER II.


On the same evening of which we have been speaking Marguerite was
sitting just outside the door, employed as she generally was in her
leisure time at lace work, of the style which had been so fashionable
during the reign of the late murdered King. How Marguerite had first
learnt this "unedifying work," we know not but as she used to work for
the family of one of the King's officers, and had seen the ladies do it,
she soon with very little instruction learnt to do it well. Very pretty
Marguerite looked bending over her "lace pillow," weaving sweet
thoughts into her work, if we may judge from the expression of her face
which was one of those that "made one feel good to look at," as Charlie
often said, and indeed it was a good thing for him to take the
remembrance of such a face through his Barrack life, which at least was
a rough one.

Marguerite had not long been enjoying the quiet of her own society when
she heard her Father call her. She immediately obeyed his summons with
that strange feeling at her heart--that strange foreshadowing of
evil--to which we have all been subject at some time in our lives.
"Again at that silly work, girl; better for thee to get something to do
about the house than waste thy time over that useless finery; I'll
warrant me when thou art Jacques Gaultier's wife he will find thee other
work--mending his nets, mayhap!"

"My dear Father, I will never be Jacques Gaultier'a wife. I have told
him so oft: I doubt if he will ever speak to me on the subject again; he
will not risk hearing rude words from me, I fancy."

"I tell thee thou _shalt_ be Jacques Gaultier's wife, and that before
long; he is coming here to-night, and I will tell him he can have thee
with my full consent. Spite of thy love for red coats, thou wilt settle
down here as a fisher's wife."

"Father, I have promised to marry Charlie and no other, and I will do
so; you used to like him ere 'my Lord Protector Cromwell' turned the
heads, if not gained the hearts, of nearly all but the loyal soldiery!
And now I will never marry any one but Charlie. You have made me speak
thus to you Father; I don't think you ought to try to make me marry one
whom in my heart I despise; and who you know well is not a good man."

"Ah! that is thy spirit, is it? Well, we'll see; I doubt if thou wilt
find that fine soldier of thine alive much longer; it would be a good
and commendable deed to sweep all such from the face of the earth."

"Yes, surely, commendable, but only in the eyes of those who murdered
our poor King, Father; but we will speak no more of these things. You
are tired with your day's work, and are not like yourself to-night. I
hear Hirzel's voice, so I will go and meet him; we are to have a walk
this evening, and you can talk quietly with Jacques, but not a word
about me; you know what my thoughts are now, Father."

Having thus spoken, Marguerite left the house, and after going through
the garden gate, she entered a pretty lane which was abundantly blessed
by Nature with a quantity of ferns and wild flowers. It was just
beginning to grow dusk, and she saw not far off Jacques Gaultier and her
brother. The latter was singing in his native _patois_ a gay song, much
to the horror of Jacques, who thought it was dreadful to do such a
thing. Dropping his usual air of hypocritical stiffness (adopted by so
many to fall in with the custom of the times), he hastened forward to
meet Marguerite, and with a show of politeness, wonderful for the rough
Jacques, raised his hat and said, "Good evening, Marguerite; it is my
fault that thy brother is late; I kept him while I was getting ready
some bobbins which I have made in the hope that thou wilt take them from
me."

"I thank thee, Jacques Gaultier, but I do not want thy bobbins; keep
them for some other girl: I am teaching many this same work, and no
doubt you will find some one glad to get them. I am going to-night where
I shall get a set made by some one whom I like better than Jacques
Gaultier. My father is waiting, so go to him; come Hirzel, don't delay
me longer."

Jacques moved off muttering to himself, and with a most murderous look
on his dark face. Poor Charlie would have fared badly had he been in
this man's power just now!




CHAPTER III.


We will follow Gaultier into the mill, leaving Marguerite and her
brother to pursue their intention of having a walk, and hear what old
Pierre has to say. On Jacques entering the room he found the old man in
a state of great disquietude--in fact, in a very great rage. He had by
no means recovered his daughter's assertion that she would never marry
anyone but Charles Heyward.

"Good evening, Jacques, I sent for thee on a matter of great importance
to thyself. I know thou did'st love my girl Marguerite, and that thou
had'st a desire to marry her. Art thou still of that mind?" Jacques was
somewhat surprised both at the old man's manner and at this opening
address, but replied, "Truly I am, but I fear she will never consent to
take me for her husband; she hates me, and loves that soldier with red
cheeks and bold forward air. I wish he were far from here; but perhaps
she would still think of him and never look on me. Even to-night she had
not a civil word for me, though I stayed at home to make these things
for her and lost my place at market."

"And serve thee right. What business hast thou to encourage the girl in
her vanities? But thou said'st just now thou would'st like to have that
fellow out of this. So would I, and the whole lot of those lawless
soldiers. Can'st thou not think of some means to catch him"?

"Well, Father Pierre, I wouldn't like---

"Wouldn't like _what_!" shouted the old man, "perhaps thou art afraid of
the popinjay in his red coat--eh, thou chicken-hearted fellow? Thou art
not the man I took thee for. I wonder not at Marguerite speaking as she
does."

"Those are hard words and I like them not," replied Jacques sulkily. He
felt the hit contained in Pierre's words all the more as he was not
quite innocent of fear of the red coat. "I was going to say," he
continued, "I wouldn't like Marguerite to know I was watching for her
soldier, as she might warn him and put him on his guard. Ah! the
hateful fellow, I wish I had my hands at his throat now."

"Gently, gently, my good Jacques," replied the elder hypocrite, "such
language becomes not a follower of our Lord Protector Cromwell. But let
us understand one another. Charlie Heyward--(the name hath but an ill
savour to me)--must be put out of the way, and Marguerite, like her sex,
will doubtless forget that he ever existed, and marry thee. I wonder
where they meet? It must be somewhere near here, but I cannot find out.
Now that he knows he is unwelcome to me, he comes not in here."

"I will try and find out, Father Pierre, and then we must devise means
for putting him out of the way, as thou seem'st to desire it, and,
mind, my reward is Marguerite, whether she be willing or not."

"Yea, my son, and here is my hand on it."

After shaking hands over this black bargain, Jacques arose and said he
must go, and wishing old Pierre "Good night," he left the mill. Turning
round when he had gone a few steps from the door, he clenched his hand
and said, "Thou tempt'st me to commit murder, but I'll take care that
thou doest the deed thyself; bad as I am I could not take Marguerite's
hand in mine after such a foul deed."

It was now getting rather late, but as Jacques had no business of his
own on hand, but rather wished, like so many others to be about
business that was _not_ his, instead of going home he thought he would
go up the cliffs by a path which swept round the side of the hill till
it came to fields that led to the Jerbourg fortress. On coming to a
corner where the path turned up the hill, he paused to look at the scene
before him, which was a lovely one: the moon was very brilliant, and the
light of it made a broad pathway across the bay--such a pathway as
always makes one wish to walk along in the calm to find a place of rest.

Perhaps the dark rocks which rose with a sort of sullen majesty straight
up from the water side, were more to Jacques' fancy than the moon path
on the water, for he was gazing intently across the hay at them, while
apparently the rest of the beautiful scene was lost on him. So intent
was his gaze at the rocks--on the summit of which was the Jerbourg
fortress--that he did not observe the presence of two persons who were
coming slowly towards him. Evidently they had not remarked him either,
which was not so much to be wondered at as they were no other than
Marguerite and Charlie!

Suddenly Jacques' attention was drawn to them by a merry laugh from
Marguerite. On looking round and seeing who were there he ground his
teeth in jealous rage and muttered to himself. "Ha! now I may discover
something," and going a few steps round the corner, he turned himself
into some bushes that overhung the path and bent down his head, prepared
to listen to the conversation of the pair coming along. Ah! Marguerite;
Ah, Charlie! how careful you would be did you know of the presence of
that dark-faced Jacques with his evil designs.

Unconsciously Jacques had placed himself in an excellent position to
hear and see all that was going on, as immediately beneath the bushes in
which he had hidden himself there was a large block of granite on which
the lovers sat down to await Hirzel, who was coming up from the bay.
Little they knew what power they were putting in the hands of one who
would not scruple to use it to the utmost.

"So your father is still against me, Marguerite?"

"Yes, Charlie; and that dreadful Jacques is persecuting me as much as
ever with his impertinent attentions. Only this evening he brought me
some bobbins which I told him he might take elsewhere."

"That reminds me I have brought with me those I have been making;
perhaps, though, you prefer those made by our dark friend, eh!
Marguerite?"

"Don't jest about him, Charlie; it frightens me even to think of him. I
am sure he would work you a mischief if he could."

"Ah! Marguerite, don't alarm yourself. The worst mischief he can work is
to bring a shade on your sweet face. All this evening I have noticed a
troubled look in those grey eyes of yours, which must be banished ere I
see you again. You surely do not think I am frightened at what such a
fellow as that can do! But what have I done with the bobbins? I hope I
have not dropped them. Ah! well! I suppose I did not bring them with me
after all, but I promise you shall have them two nights hence."

"No, Charlie, you must not come near here again for some time, as I am
certain there is danger, and I would far rather wait to see you until
you can come with safety. I feel there is something wrong going on
between my father and Jacques."

"Nonsense, Marguerite; you really must not have these idle fancies. I
shall come over in the evening after dark. You come up this path, and
show the light of a lantern three times if all is well. Then I will
start from our barracks, and come as quickly round the cliffs as I can.
You return to the mill, and go to the granary; I will climb up the mill
wheel. If I remember rightly, the granary window is just over the wheel.
Then I shall be able to speak to you for a few minutes, and bring the
precious little bobbins."

"Halloo! Charlie, where are you, and what have you done with my sister?"

"Oh! there is Hirzel. How he frightened me," exclaimed Marguerite, who
evidently feared everything to-night.

"She is all right, old fellow. Come along, you are just in time to take
her home; I must be off, or black hole for me."

Hirzel now appeared from the midst of the ferns and gorse, and came up
on the path and joined his sister and Charlie.

"The fish won't bite to-night, somehow; _they_ are not so easily caught
by a dazzling bait as some other things I could mention. Ha! Marguerite,
you seem to take it to yourself. Well, perhaps I mean you, and perhaps I
don't; but come along, Father will think you are lost."

Hirzel said "Good night" to Charlie, and moved off discreetly, leaving
his sister to follow.

"Don't forget Wednesday night, Marguerite; I shall look for your signal
about eight, and if all's well, I'll be round by nine. I will get leave
to stay out later than usual that night."

"Well, Charlie, I won't prevent your coming this once, but my heart
sadly misgives me. I hope nothing will happen to you."

"Don't be foolish, Marguerite, but run away after your brother; he is
looking impatient, and you know this is nicer for me than for him! He is
a brave good lad, worthy of having such a sister as he has. Good bye
till Wednesday. Mind, don't forget the signal. Good night, Hirzel."

"Well! time you said it old fellow," shouted Hirzel, "I have knocked
about all the stones in the neighbourhood with my stick, so was
beginning to be at a loss for employment. Come quickly. Marguerite."

On the way home Marguerite told her brother how Charlie was to come and
see her on Wednesday, and they arranged that Hirzel should stop about
the house so fearful of some violence occurring was Marguerite.




CHAPTER IV.


When Hirzel and his sister were out of sight, Jacques got down from his
hiding place and walked after them with the intention of telling old
Pierre what he had heard, and also to reveal to him a plan which had
suggested itself to his evil mind for destroying the young soldier when
he came to visit Marguerite on the following Wednesday evening. Jacques
changed his mind about going in when he came near the mill. He saw
through the open door Pierre talking with his children; he thought he
should not be able to see the old man alone that night, and besides, he
had a feeling which kept him back from entering Marguerite's presence
when he was plotting against her happiness in such a deadly manner. So
Gaultier turned his steps homeward, revolving in his mind the plan he
had laid out which was briefly this. The mill wheel was secured by a
rope which passed round the corner of the house and into a room behind
the granary, where it was fastened to a rafter. Now Gaultier thought
that when Charlie was standing on the wheel, if he could get old Pierre
to unfasten the rope, the sudden starting round of the wheel would
precipiate Charlie into the stream below, where he must inevitably be
dashed to pieces. Well thought of, Jacques Gaultier; but it is a pity
thy ingenuity had not been turned to better account!

Jacques spent a most restless night, for the awfulness of the crime
which he was meditating presented itself unceasingly to his mind; but,
on the other hand, he pictured to himself Marguerite Charlie's wife,
therefore lost to him. Not only did he hate Charlie on this score, but
political feeling, as well as the frank pleasant manner of the young
soldier, assisted in making Jacques look hardly on him. He could'nt but
remark the different manner in which he was treated. People rather
avoided than courted the society of "Dark Jacques Gaultier," as he was
called by the boys round his neighbourhood, with the disagreeable
honesty of "small boy" youth.

Jacques was one of those unhappy beings who live with their blinds down
and windows shut, morally speaking; and yet who wonder that they don't
get the bright light and pure air into their minds, which cause some of
their brethren to be such refreshing bits in the way through life. One
of these was Charlie: he went happily through life, carrying sunshine
with him wherever he went: he felt sorry for Jacques, and would
willingly have been friends with him, but in their relative positions
this was impossible. All his overtures were received with decided
rudeness on the part of Jacques, when they received any notice at all,
so Charlie gave up, and took the situation as inevitable. When morning
came Jacques rose very early and went down to the mill. He judged the
early morning to be the best time to see the old man by himself. In this
he was correct, for when he got there he found Pierre was the only one
down. He was standing in the little garden in the front of the house.
After they had exchanged the customary greetings of the place, the old
miller asked Jacques "what had brought him out so early."

The latter told him all he had overheard the preceding evening, and then
he unfolded his plan, for Charlie's destruction, but tried to impress on
the old man that he had better loosen the rope himself.

This Pierre would not listen to; said his courage might fail him; then
pleaded his age, failing strength, and many other things; finally, he
said, he would not do it, adding, "One would think I wanted the girl for
my wife; no, do thy own business unless thou art very anxious to give
Marguerite to this fine soldier. I warrant me that will be the end of
it."

"Father Pierre, thou well know'st I would sooner die a thousand times
than _he_ should have her, so I will do the thing myself; but how shall
I give reason for my presence here? Marguerite, for days, even weeks
past, has been looking at me with suspicion in her eyes, as though she
divined my thoughts towards that lover of hers?"

"Leave all to me. Can I not have whom I like in my own house? I see
that though thou may'st not dread other things, thou art well
frightened at a woman's looks. Well, well, there's something in that,
too."

"Yes, Father Pierre, there is; much sometimes."

"But leave looks to mind themselves now, and I will show you what to do,
and where to go. You can well be in the room behind the granary, as one
or two of the rafters need mending. Let Marguerite see you leave your
work and start for home; then when she goes to show her light say 'All
is well,' thou can'st come back and be ready for the bird with his
bright plumage. Ha! he would go elsewhere and pipe his song, did he know
the manner in which we are preparing his perch!"

"That is all well; the popinjay can't escape us now."

"Come in, Jacques, and have some breakfast with us; I think I hear
Marguerite busy at it now."

"Marguerite will not have a welcome for me, I know; but as she is to be
my wife, she may as well get used to my presence now."

When they entered Marguerite turned round wondering who could be with
her Father at such an early hour. On seeing who it was, her face
clouded, and she immediately experienced that same feeling of fear come
over her as she always had of late when she saw her Father and Jacques
Gaultier together. She said "good morning" to them, and then resumed the
preparation for the morning meal. Jacques' dark eyes followed her all
about the room; doubtless he was thinking of the time when she would be
performing the same duties under his roof, while she--Well, we will not
penetrate into her thoughts; no doubt she would prefer keeping them to
herself, so we will let her, in the certainty that the train of thought
was very different to that of Jacques Gaultier.

Hirzel now appeared, announcing that he was ready to eat up all, his
sister included. Breakfast being ready, they all drew their chairs near
the table, Marguerite begging Hirzel to come and sit near her, as she
wanted to speak to him. The boy saw that she wished to keep Gaultier
off, and with his usual teasing way, he made signs behind that worthy's
back to the effect that his sister ought to ask him to sit by her.
However, when Hirzel saw that his sister looked really troubled, he came
immediately like a good brother and did what his sister wished. All this
was not lost on that wretched Jacques, who between present
circumstances, and his own thoughts of what must come before he gained
Marguerite, had by no means an enviable position.

During the repast Pierre informed Hirzel that on the afternoon of the
following day he had a particular message to send him on, as it was one
some way off, he might take the cart or ride if he preferred it.

"Very well, Father, I'll go for you; riding is best if I have nothing
to carry."

"And thou, Jacques," said old Pierre, "will come after thy fishing is
past and mend the rafters I told thee of in the room behind the
granary." "But Father," said Hirzel, "why not let me do that work for
you? I would like to, and ride for this message the day after."

Hirzel said this, because he remembered his sister's arrangement with
Charlie, and he knew that she particularly wished him to be at home,
especially now that there was some chance of Jacques being about.

"Thou would'st like to work indoors? Why what has come to thee Hirzel?"

"You had better do what Father wishes Hirzel," said Marguerite. She saw
her brother was troubled as to what was best to be done; also, she was
very much afraid lest he should say something to betray matters. So she
thought she would settle it quietly, especially when she remembered that
Charlie would not come until she had shown the light, which she firmly
resolved should not be shown until Jacques was well out of the place.

Breakfast being over, Jacques took his leave, and the others dispersed
to their various occupations--each of the four with very different
thoughts and hopes as to what the morrow might bring forth, but at
present, like all the rest of mankind, their first business was to get
through "to-day" as well as they could.




CHAPTER V.


The morning following the events recorded in the last chapter was
ushered in with bright sunshine, and everything pleasant, so far as
outward appearances went, in and out of the mill, though some hearts
were restless or uneasy as to how it would be when the sun rose to run
his accustomed course the next morning. Charlie was perhaps the happiest
of all those whose fortunes we are now following. He had but slight
clouds to dim his horizon; at least his horizon as seen by his own
eyes. He went cheerfully and gladly through his duties that morning, and
never did he more fully merit the name of "Happy Charlie" bestowed on
him by his comrades in the gallant 22nd than he did on the morning in
question. The truth was he was beginning to tire of old Pierre Moullin's
determined refusal to have anything to say to him in the character of
son-in-law. He had made up his mind (and being of a hopeful nature,
considered more than half the battle was fought in consequence), that
come what might, he would prevail on Marguerite to marry him at once,
and trust to gain her Father's forgiveness when the deed was done beyond
recall. And so our friend Charlie whistled and sang through this day,
building all sorts of pleasant castles about his future life, little
thinking what a train was being laid, to which, if the match were
applied, he and his castles would be blown up in a more sanguinary, if
not more decisive manner, than these airy fabrications generally have to
yield to!

Hirzel had been detained on various pretexts by his Father; in
consequence he was rather late in starting for this important business
on which he was to be despatched. From the time he managed to get off,
it was not at all likely that he could be back before 10 o'clock.
Marguerite's heart quite misgave her when she heard this, but as time
moved on, and it came to half-past 7, she was re-assured to find that
Jacques Gaultier was putting away his tools, and finally left the house,
saying that he had "work for himself at home, but would return the
following morning to finish repairing those rafters that had so suddenly
got out of repair."

Matters seemed better still when her Father said he did not feel at all
himself that night, and that he thought he would go off to bed.
Marguerite wished him "Good night;" and at 8 o'clock found herself alone
and mistress of her own actions. She might now have brought Charlie into
the house, but that she remembered her Father's prohibition of such a
thing; and at least she thought it best and fittest to leave him master
in his own house, at the same time reserving to herself liberty to
control her own actions. This was fair enough.

At about 8 o'clock, as agreed on, Marguerite took her little lantern,
and going round the path to where they had been standing two evenings
before, she flashed the light three times trusting that Charlie would be
able to see it. Meanwhile Jacques had come out from one of the mill
sheds, where he had been concealed, and went quickly up to the room
behind the granary, only pausing on his way to tell old Pierre that he
was there.

We will leave him waiting for his prey, with a dark sardonic smile on
his ill-favoured countenance, and return to Marguerite, who is waiting
in the granary for her lover, confident that "all is well," and having
no thoughts but pleasant ones concerning the coming meeting. Even the
remembrance of Hirzel's absence brings no disquietude with it. Her
thoughts shape themselves into a blessing when her brother's bright
manly face comes before her, and then she bends all her attention to
listen for Charlie's approach.

She had been waiting for rather more than an hour, when she heard her
name called softly; then up Charlie scrambled, and when standing on the
wheel his head comes just half way up the window.

"Well, here I am, Marguerite; I hope you were not alarmed at the time I
have taken, but I was on duty when I saw your signal, and it was some
little time before I could get away."

"I was getting a little anxious, Charlie, but 'all is well' now that you
have come."

"Ah, that is right! but how are you to-night, little woman--all the
fancies fled?"

"Almost Charlie, but still not quite; you will think me very foolish, I
know, but everything was so beautifully arranged for my seeing you
easily to-night that I can't help thinking that some one else has been
arranging too for some purpose of his own."

"Come, come, you little croaker, try and put such thoughts out of your
pretty head, and remember I 'deserve the fair' after having been so
'brave' as to mount this rickety wheel, but I wish you would take this
parcel from me; the bobbins are in it, which I have perilled my life to
bring! I hope you see my devotion clearly, eh?"

"I do, indeed, Charlie, and now I shall work all the better and be more
in earnest; I don't mean you to have all the work on your shoulders when
we marry; I know I shall be able to get sale for my lace amongst the
beautiful ladies you tell me of in England."

"Ah, Marguerite, that is just what I wanted to speak to you about; I
suppose your Father still wishes you to marry that rascal Gaultier? By
the way, I believe he or some one very like him was sneaking round the
cliffs on Monday night. After I left you, I fancied I saw him; it might
be _only_ fancy. Did you see anything of him?

"I wish--."

       *       *       *       *       *

Alas! poor Charlie! Will you speak again to finish that sentence and
tell what you wish? For suddenly the mill wheel has turned round with a
tremendous crash, and the brave young soldier has been hurled down! And
Marguerite, what of her? With one agonized cry she rushed to the door
intending to run outside to see if anything could be done for Charlie,
when she came face to face with Jacques Gaultier! In an instant it all
flashed on her that he must have wrought this terrible work, and,
overcome by grief and horror, she sank down in a deadly faint. Bad man
as he was, Jacques was really overcome at the consequences of his act,
for he thought he had also killed Marguerite. He called loudly to her
Father, who came up hurriedly. He was also seriously alarmed when his
gaze rested on his child lying like one dead on the floor. Between them
they carried her downstairs and laid her on her bed. They applied such
restoratives as suggested themselves, but as everything was for sometime
quite unavailing, a more miserable pair it would have been difficult to
discover.

Hirzel now came in. He was running upstairs to the granary when his
Father called him in to see if he could do anything for his poor sister.

"A pretty night's work this," he said, when he came into the room and
saw his sister lying there.

At this moment she opened her eyes, and he went close to her and raised
her in his arms. With an expression of deep thankfulness, Marguerite's
first words were to send that murderer, Jacques Gaultier, away out of
her sight. Hirzel ordered him to leave the room, with more fierceness in
his tone than anyone had heard there before.

"Oh! Hirzel, what shall I do without Charlie? Stay with me, only you,
and I will tell you all."

Hearing this her Father left the room, and Hirzel bent down and
whispered to her---

"Charlie is alive and well. He told me to tell you this himself."

"Oh! Hirzel, you are deceiving me. How could he be alive after such a
dreadful fall? It was terrible."

Here Marguerite's fortitude gave way, and she indulged in a flood of
tears, while Hirzel looked at her with the masculine helplessness usual
on such occasions, and indeed it seemed to cost the fine tender-hearted
fellow an effort to keep from joining in them too. At last he said,
"Well Marguerite, if you don't stop, I'll go off, and tell Charlie you
only cried after you heard he was alive and well."

"Ah! Hirzel, is that not the way with our sex. Sometimes, to cry over
the best and happiest times while the worst is bravely borne?"

Hirzel then told Marguerite how he had met Charlie just outside at the
foot of the lane, considerably bruised and knocked about, though without
any internal injuries. How he escaped was nothing short of a miracle,
one of those things which occasionally happen, perhaps, to show what
can be done when there is the will to do it.

There was an iron loop which projected about a foot from the walls, this
Charlie made a spring at after the manner of a gymnast; he caught it,
and although it came away in his grasp, yet it broke his fall, and what
was of more importance, changed the direction of his course to the
brickwork alongside the wheel, instead of the water under it. Once on
the brickwork he jumped down into the garden, and went out into the
lane, where he met Hirzel.

Charlie did not for a moment suspect that there was anything but pure
accident in what had happened, and as he met Hirzel just at that moment
he judged it wisest not to return near the house in case he should get
Marguerite into trouble; but after telling Hirzel to assure his sister
that he was safe, he set off to the fortress, little thinking he was
supposed to be lying dead at the foot of the Moulin Huet cliffs, carried
there by the mill stream.

Marguerite now told to her brother, her suspicions of how all had
happened. He wished to go immediately and tax Jacques with the crime;
but, in deference to his sister's wishes, remained where he was. The
noise of the mill wheel turning round suddenly ceased, and on Hirzel's
going up to ascertain the cause, he found his Father tying up the rope
in the room behind the granary. This rope passed out of a small round
hole in the wall of this room, and round the corner of the house where
it was attached to the wheel. The window through which Charlie and
Marguerite had been talking was rather a large one, but had some iron
bars across which had prevented Marguerite leaning out to see what had
become of Charlie. This perhaps was as well, for at best his descent
would have been extremely trying to look at.

The next morning did not bring Jacques to finish his work, but in the
evening he appeared, after vainly trying to induce Marguerite to speak
to him, which naturally she was very loath to do, went and commenced his
work, which he went steadily on with, though he was very much fatigued
by having no rest the preceding night, and now had been out fishing all
day. He sat down to rest for a few minutes when he fell asleep. After
dark old Pierre came round to lock all the doors, as was his nightly
custom. Looking in and not seeing Jacques he supposed he had gone and
locked that door also. Pierre then went to rest himself, and all were
buried in slumber, with the exception of Hirzel, who had gone over to
Jerbourg to acquaint Charlie with all that had happened. About 9
o'clock, as Charlie and Hirzel were coming out of the barracks, they saw
flames rising in the direction of the mill. It was but the work of a
moment for Charlie to run back and get leave for some of his comrades to
come with him, and off they set for the mill. On arriving there they
found their surmises correct: both house and mill were enveloped in
flames. Marguerite and her Father were safely out, but the latter was in
a dreadful state of misery at seeing all his property go like this.
Charlie went up to him after he had spoken to Marguerite, and said he
would try and save the wheel for future murders. Seeing Charlie, whom he
fully thought to be dead, and hearing these words, the old man shrank
back with horror. He fell on his knees and begged Charlie to forgive
him, adding that it was not he who had done it, but Jacques. Charlie
raised the old man, saying all should be forgiven and forgotten on one
condition. That condition we need hardly state was permission to marry
Marguerite without further trouble. Until Pierre had said so Charlie,
had no idea that he knew any thing of his intended destruction. It
saddened him very much and made him very sorry for the old man; however,
he had other things to think of, so he set all the other soldiers to
hand up water from the mill stream, which was now running for some
little time. Suddenly a shout from one of the soldiers called Charlie's
attention, and on going to see what it was, he found him dragging a body
out of the mill stream. With some difficulty he recognized Jacques
Gaultier, as it was rather dark just there. Jacques revived a little,
and told Charlie how on waking he had found the room full of smoke, and
finding the door locked he broke it down, but the door of the granary
resisted all his efforts, so he put all his strength towards tearing the
bars from the window. He succeeded in this and got out on the wheel, but
directly he tried to get down the rope--which doubtless had been much
charred by the flames--gave way, and down he went. He had seen from the
window, Charlie and his comrades coming, and this endued him with
further strength, but all to no purpose. He implored Charlie's
forgiveness, and turning over with a groan he died.

Little now remains to be told. Owing to the exertions of the soldiers
some of the machinery was saved, but the old man never made any use of
it; he had too great a horror of anything like a mill after his past
experiences. Charlie and Marguerite were soon married. They lived at
Castle Cornet for some time, and after the restoration went with the
Regiment to England, where Marguerite could display her loyalty
undisturbed. Hirzel remained heart-whole to the last we hear of him, and
after his Father's death went and lived with his sister in England, to
see for himself some of the wonders which Charlie had described to him
in his own little Island home.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LEGEND OF MOULIN HUET***


******* This file should be named 14118.txt or 14118.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/4/1/1/14118



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

