The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is Going On
In It, Vol. 1, No. 46, September 23, 1897, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Great Round World and What Is Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 46, September 23, 1897
       A Weekly Magazine for Boys and Girls

Author: Various

Editor: Julia Truitt Bishop

Release Date: June 8, 2005 [EBook #16024]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD AND ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.(www.pgdp.net)








[Illustration: THE GREAT ROUND
WORLD
AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT.]

    VOL. 1   SEPTEMBER 23, 1897.   NO. 46

=Copyright, 1897, THE GREAT ROUND WORLD Publishing Company.=

       *       *       *       *       *

The latest news from India is of a most encouraging nature.

It is supposed that the announcement made by the British Government that
they mean to send a strong force to punish the rebellious tribes has had
a good effect.

The Afridis are reported to have held a council of war, and have decided
to return to their homes and gather in their harvests. The head men of
the tribe are said to be responsible for this decision, because they
made a strong stand against the continuation of the war.

It is probable that the reason of their return to their homes is not
altogether because of their harvests, but that other tribes which had
agreed to join in the uprising have become alarmed at the action of the
British, and, fearful lest they too may come in for punishment, have
refused to take any part in the border war.

Haddah Mullah, the mad priest who is accused of having incited the
tribes to rebel in the first instance, has also given in. It is said
that he has dispersed his followers of the Swati tribe, and that they
have returned to their homes.

The Mullah had been gathering forces together for an attack on Peshawar,
a strong British fort. To make his attempt successful he needed more men
than he had under his command; he therefore ordered a tribe called the
Mohmands to join him, and marched toward Peshawar, expecting to meet
them on the way.

When he and his followers arrived at the meeting-place, he found to his
dismay that instead of the host of warriors he had expected, there was
only a messenger from the chief of the Mohmands, who told him in very
plain terms that they would have nothing to do with either the revolt or
the attack on Peshawar.

On hearing this it is said that the Mullah was so discouraged that he
refused to lead the Swatis anymore, and ordered his followers to go back
to their homes.

If this report be indeed true, the worst of the rebellion is undoubtedly
over, for the Haddah Mullah was the most dangerous enemy the British had
to fear in the frontier war. By preying upon the superstitions of the
tribe he had obtained such an influence over them that they regarded him
as a prophet and obeyed his slightest word.

To make them fight bravely he distributed rice that had been colored
pink among his followers on the eve of a battle, and assured them that
all who carried it would pass through the fiercest battle without a
wound or scratch.

On one occasion when the rice had been handed round from man to man it
was found after the fight was over that the Mullah's hand was very badly
cut. His followers began to murmur, and wonder how the giver of this
charmed rice could himself be wounded in battle. The Mullah was,
however, smart enough to invent a story about having seized a bayonet
and purposely cut himself. His simple followers believed him, and
continued to use the wonderful rice.

The withdrawal of this crafty priest from active opposition will be a
great assistance to the British cause, which has also been greatly
strengthened during the last few days by the friendly attitude of the
Ameer of Afghanistan.

We told you how the British suspected that this ruler had helped to stir
up the rebellion: at one time it was decided to send him another letter,
calling him sharply to account for his double dealing.

Before any such action could be taken, news was brought that the Ameer
had caused the arrest of forty important tribesmen, who were supposed to
have assisted the mad Mullah in rousing the people against the British.

This action has had such an excellent effect on the tribes that many
people suppose Great Britain's frontier war is over.

The English have still a great deal to do on the borders of Afghanistan.
For the sake of their future power in India they dare not let the
natives think they can rebel against England without being severely
punished. Whether the revolt is really over or not, a force will have to
be sent against the rebellious tribes to teach them proper respect for
British power.

       *       *       *       *       *

General Woodford has arrived safely in Spain, and is to be presented to
the Queen Regent in a few days.

He has, in the mean while, met the Duke of Tetuan, and has been very
pleasantly received.

A great sensation has, however, been caused in Havana by the publication
of a letter from General Azcarraga, the present Spanish Prime Minister.
In this letter the minister says that the Spanish Government will not
listen to any demands from the United States, that no one in Spain
thinks our country has any right to interfere in the Cuban question, and
that rather than submit to American dictation, Spain is prepared to
declare war.

In the letter it is also said that if it becomes necessary to declare
war, Spain is confident that she will have the support of the nations of
Europe. It is argued that if we succeed in freeing Cuba we will be
certain to try and get Canada and Jamaica away from England, and the
French possessions from their mother country.

The General asserts that if the United States succeeds in freeing Cuba,
European rule in the New World will soon cease to exist.

Finally, he says that if General Woodford's mission is after all merely
to claim damages from Spain, he will be listened to with the utmost
politeness, and then informed that Spain also has her claims against
America. But if General Woodford persists in entering on the subject of
the Cuban war, he will be told that Spain does not admit the right of
the United States to interfere in her private affairs, and the
ambassador will be politely but firmly requested to mind his own
business.

Every one is most anxious to learn just what General Woodford's mission
is, and how Spain will receive it.

In the mean while many people are wondering why Spain has suddenly
become so averse to parting with her colonies. Many times in the last
century she has ceded and sold them, and it seems strange that she
should be unwilling to let Cuba purchase her freedom when it is the
easiest way out of the present difficulty.

At one time Spain had vast possessions in the New World. Louisiana,
Florida, Mexico, the Central American States, Venezuela, Colombia,
Ecuador, Bolivia, Peru, Chile, Paraguay, Uruguay, and the Argentine
Republic were all under the rule of Spain.

One by one these countries have thrown off the Spanish yoke; Cuba is
only following in their footsteps, and yet while the mother country has
been content to receive valuable considerations for her other provinces,
she declares that to surrender Cuba would be to forfeit her honor.

Affairs in Madrid are approaching a crisis. It is rumored that within
two weeks General Azcarraga will cease to be Prime Minister, and that
Senor Sagasta will be called to take command of the affairs of State.
Sagasta, as we have told you, has very broad views about Cuba, and
wishes for nothing so much as peace with the unhappy little island.

The affairs of the election in Cuba are progressing quietly.

The election should have taken place on September 1st, but the bad
roads made travelling so difficult that some of the most important
members of the Assembly were unable to get to the meeting, and so the
business of electing a President has had to be postponed for a few days.

The Cubans say that the first work of the new administration must be to
establish a government for _peace_. Up to the present time their
thoughts have all been directed toward preserving the army in the field,
and making it possible to continue the war.

The rebellion has now such a strong hold in the eastern part of the
island that it is necessary to provide laws for the welfare of those who
are living under the flag of free Cuba, which, as we have told you
before, now floats over Santiago de Cuba.

The Government has already established factories and workshops to
furnish supplies for the army, and about five thousand persons are
employed in them.

There are tanneries where the skins of beasts are made into leather;
shoe, saddle, harness, gunpowder, and dynamite factories, and workshops
for repairing arms and reloading gun-cartridges.

A newspaper man who says he has been through these establishments states
that while they are somewhat old-fashioned in their methods, owing to
the impossibility of obtaining the newest machinery, the work they turn
out is excellent.

The Cuban Government is also providing for the education of its
subjects. Free schools are being established wherever it is safe to do
so, and every effort is being made to render the people who acknowledge
the rule of the young republic happy and law-abiding.

One of the candidates for the Presidency is Gen. Bartolome Maso, who
holds the office of Vice-President under the present administration.

Senor Maso is a dear friend and close companion of President Cisneros;
so warm is this friendship, indeed, that Cisneros has offered to
withdraw from the candidacy in favor of Maso, and Maso has refused to
let him do so, declaring that he can serve the republic just as well
whether he is President or private citizen.

Maso is one of the soldiers who fought in the revolt ten years ago. He
was one of the first to take up arms against Spain on the present
occasion. You must not confound him with Maceo, the murdered general.
This man is Bartolome Maso, the dead general was Antonio Maceo.

Senor Maso is often lovingly referred to by the Cubans as the father of
the revolution.

Consul-General Lee has returned from Cuba. He has been ill for some
months, and has obtained a few weeks' leave of absence in which to
regain his strength. There are reports that he is not to return to Cuba,
but that another Consul-General is to be appointed in his place. These
rumors are not generally credited.

From the Philippine Islands the news comes that the natives intend to
prolong the war until Spain's money is exhausted, and then force her to
agree to their demands.

The main fighting in this insurrection has taken place on the island of
Luzon. This island has been visited by a terrible disaster. One of its
volcanic mountains has suddenly burst into activity, and thrown out
streams of lava in such volume that they have travelled over twenty
miles of country until they reached the sea.

It is said that several villages have been destroyed by the lava flow,
and about five hundred persons killed.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is once more a prospect of a settlement of the Greek question.

After the rejection of Lord Salisbury's plan, about which we told you
last week, it seemed as if matters would again be brought to a
standstill. England refused to consent to any plan that did not include
the withdrawal of Turkish troops from Thessaly, and Germany would not
listen to any arrangement that did not include the full control of the
Greek Treasury.

The Russian Minister, fearing another long delay, appealed to England,
and demanded that she should agree to Germany's plan, or propose some
other that would be agreeable to all the parties concerned.

Lord Salisbury therefore made a new proposal to this effect. The Powers
should take control of the revenues set aside by Greece for the payment
of the war debt to Turkey, and that yet another sum should be handed
over to the Powers to secure the payment of her other debts.

The proposal also stated that when Greece had put the funds into the
hands of the Powers, Turkey was immediately to recall her troops from
Thessaly.

The ambassadors all agreed to accept this plan, which, in truth, gave
both Germany and England the points they desired. After the foreign
Ministers had decided to accept it, it was shown informally to Tewfik
Pasha.

This official also appeared satisfied with the arrangements, and gave
the ambassadors to understand that when it was formally presented to him
he would be able to accept it in the name of the Sultan.

It is therefore expected that the details of the peace treaty will be
settled in a very few days.

Greece, the country most interested in this settlement, is the party
least satisfied with the arrangement.

It is felt in Athens that the terms of the peace are very hard ones. The
frontier question has been so settled that Greece is powerless to defend
herself against the Turks if they should declare war on her again. The
mountain passes and the important places in the mountain ranges will be
in the hands of the Turks, and Greece will lie at the foot of the hills,
a ready prey to any army that may descend on her from the heights.

In addition to this, she has to pay a heavy war indemnity, and to do so
must turn over the control of her revenue to foreigners.

It will take many years before Greece can recover from this blow.

The blockade of Crete is to be brought to an end, or "raised" as it is
called.

The Cretans having accepted the Home Rule offered them by the Powers,
there is no longer any need for the allied fleets to remain there, and
therefore the war-ships are to leave the island.

It is difficult to see what good they have accomplished. When Djevad
Pasha arrived at the island, giving himself all the airs of a new
Turkish governor, the Cretans accepted Home Rule in the belief that the
Powers would protect them from the Turks.

Not being wily diplomatists, they did not insert any clause about the
withdrawal of Turkish troops from the island, and therefore the Powers
do not feel bound to demand this of Turkey, and are taking away the only
protection the Cretans had, and are leaving them just as much at the
mercy of the Turks as they were before Greece tried to go to their
rescue.

It seems a shabby piece of business on the part of the Powers, and one
they will have hard work to justify even to themselves.

The admirals have, it is true, requested Djevad Pasha to order all the
Turks in the island disarmed with the exception of the Turkish soldiers.
If he refuses they threaten to ask for his recall, but this is a very
poor conclusion after all the fuss that has been made, and the trouble
the interference of the Powers has caused.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is good news from the Soudan.

After the British had taken the town of Abu Hamed, about which we told
you a short while since, they continued to advance up the Nile toward
the next important town that lay in their route to Khartoum.

This town was Berber.

It was expected that the Mahdists would make a fierce resistance at this
place, and the British troops were prepared for severe fighting.

What was their surprise on reaching Berber to find that the Mahdists
had fled before them, and were encamped at the city of Matammeh, where
they intended to make a stand against the invading army.

Berber had been left in the hands of a few Soudanese who were friendly
to the English, and willingly permitted them to take possession of the
town.

This city is only about two hundred miles from Khartoum, and no place of
importance now lies in the way of the British advance on Khartoum, the
Mahdist stronghold.

       *       *       *       *       *

A very interesting movement is on foot to secure the return of the Jews
to Palestine.

We are all familiar with the beautiful story of Moses, and how he led
the Jewish people out of their captivity in Egypt into the promised land
of Palestine.

We can follow out the history of the kingdom of Israel through its years
of prosperity under David and Solomon; we can read how the Jews again
became a conquered people, and fell under the rule of the Assyrians, the
Babylonians, the Persians, and how under the leadership of Maccabeus
they once more became a nation, only to fall into the hands of the
Romans.

History tells us how they revolted again and again under the Roman rule,
and how at last, in the year 135 A.D., Jerusalem was taken by the Roman
Emperor, and the Jews, driven from their country, ceased to be a nation,
and were scattered over the face of the earth.

From the year 135 Palestine remained in the hands of the Romans, and
when they became converted to Christianity this land was regarded by
them with great veneration. Bethlehem of Judea, where Jesus Christ was
born, is in Palestine, and Jerusalem, where He suffered death on the
cross, was the capital of Judea.

In the sixth century Palestine fell into the hands of the Mohammedans,
and it was to rescue the Holy City from the hands of unbelievers that
the Christians of Europe first undertook those long and terrible wars
which are known in history as the Crusades.

The Christians finally conquered Jerusalem, and established a Christian
kingdom there which lasted for eighty years, when the celebrated
Saladin, Sultan of Egypt and Syria, reconquered the Holy City.

Since that time Palestine has been in the hands of the Mohammedans, and
in the year 1517 it was finally added to the Turkish Empire.

The present idea of the Jewish people is to purchase Palestine from the
Sultan of Turkey and re-settle the Hebrews there.

A Hebrew Congress has just been held in Basle, Switzerland, for the
purpose of discussing this matter.

On the second day of the Congress a resolution was offered that a home
be created in Palestine for the Jewish people, and that the consent and
assistance of the Powers be asked to the plan.

The resolution was instantly adopted, amid the greatest excitement and
enthusiasm.

Little more business was done that day. The people present were so
excited with the hope of becoming a nation once more that they could
not bring their minds to consider any less important subject.

The next day, however, the Congress settled itself to a business-like
consideration of the plan. It was resolved to treat with the Sultan of
Turkey for the purchase of Palestine, and a committee was formed to
collect funds for that object, it being considered desirable to raise
fifty million dollars as speedily as possible.

The idea of recolonizing Palestine is not a new one. In 1840 the
generous Sir Moses Montefiore endeavored to start the scheme. Since his
day several other attempts have been made.

In 1878 some Jews in Jerusalem founded the first colony there, and
through the assistance of Baron Edmond de Rothschild, and of a Jewish
society in Paris, there are already five thousand Hebrews settled in
Palestine. They have a tract of land about six square miles in extent,
and have it in excellent cultivation, producing among other things an
excellent vintage of Bordeaux, which is a high grade of claret.

The present plan originated with Dr. Theodor Herzl of Vienna. He is a
literary man whose work is well known in Austria, and he is considered
well fitted to be the leader of this great movement.

Dr. Herzl says that he does not think there will be much difficulty in
making terms with the Sultan.

He visited Constantinople last year, and had two long conversations with
the Grand Vizier on the subject. While this minister did not answer Yes
or No to his project, Dr. Herzl says that he can but feel that the
Sultan was favorably impressed by it, as he sent him a decoration.

A "decoration" is a badge or emblem, such as a cross, star, flower, or
the like, which is bestowed by a sovereign as a special mark of favor or
in recognition of some great service. Medals received for bravery on the
field of battle are decorations.

Some of these decorations, or orders, as they are also called, are
extremely beautiful in workmanship and design. Each country has its own
special orders, a certain few of which are only bestowed on royalty, or
persons of very high rank.

Decorations are intended to be worn on the left breast. To attach them
to the clothing they are threaded on a ribbon which varies in color and
design for every order. In Europe, medals and orders are only worn on
full-dress occasions, but for ordinary use the proud owners of these
marks of distinction will wear a small strip of ribbon belonging to the
order.

These favors are not, as a rule, lightly bestowed, and the possessors of
the important European orders are rightfully proud of them.

The decorating of Dr. Herzl may have been nothing more than amiability
on the part of the Sultan, but it certainly showed that his Majesty was
not displeased with the doctor's mission.

The leaders of this new movement are not, however, pinning all their
faith on the Sultan.

If it becomes impossible to secure Palestine they will treat for a tract
of land in some healthy part of South America.

The land once secured, it is the intention to send a number of the
poorer Jews out to it.

These men are to be drawn from the laboring classes, and it is to be
their work to lay out streets, build bridges and railroads, etc., and
generally prepare the way for those who are to follow.

It is not intended to make any class distinctions of rich or poor, or to
send out a class of rich persons to profit by the work done for them by
their less fortunate brothers. The leaders of the movement will lay out
extensive works in the various kinds of building that we have mentioned,
and it is expected that the business these works will create will
attract settlers to the new country, who will start up foundries and
factories. It is the intention to furnish the colony with all the latest
improvements and inventions, and it is but reasonable to suppose that
the new land will soon become an important centre of industry.

The promoters of the scheme look for great assistance from England, and
have approached Lord Salisbury in the hope of gaining his friendship.

Europe would of course have a great deal to say about the establishment
of an enlightened and progressive race on the borders of the Red Sea,
and the new nation could not be established without the consent of the
Powers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Russia is about building a new canal, which, when finished, will be one
of the greatest works ever undertaken.

It is to connect the Baltic Sea with the Black Sea, and is to be one
thousand miles in length.

It is to start from Riga on the Baltic, and run to Kherson at the mouth
of the Dneiper River, where that river empties itself into the Black
Sea.

The advantages of this canal will be very great.

At the present time a vessel voyaging from the Baltic to the Black Sea
has to go all round Europe before it reaches its destination. Take your
map and follow out the course a ship must take. It must skirt Denmark
and pass into the North Sea, then go through the Straits of Dover, down
the coast of France, across the Bay of Biscay, and down the coast of
Portugal until the Straits of Gibraltar are reached. Here the vessel
must pass into the beautiful Mediterranean Sea, and follow it along
through the Grecian Archipelago, through the Dardanelles into the Sea of
Marmora, and passing through the Bosporus, it at last finds itself in
the Black Sea.

The time required to make such a long voyage is a great loss to
merchants, and the vessel has to pass through so many narrow straits and
past so many strategic points that the voyage could hardly be undertaken
if Russia were at war with any foreign nation.

The canal is to be 213 feet wide at the surface, 115 feet at the base,
and to have a depth of 27 feet.

It should, therefore, be a very fine canal.

Germany and the United States are both very pleased about this great
work, for both nations see in it an opportunity to sell their iron and
steel manufactures.

The Czar of Russia has issued an order that there is to be no more
exiling to Siberia except for certain very serious crimes.

Instead, large prisons are to be built in Central Russia for the
political criminals. The change is to go into effect in one year's time,
when it is supposed that the new prisons will be in readiness.

It seems almost too good to be true that the terrors of Siberian exile
are to be abolished. To most of the unfortunate prisoners who were
interviewed by Mr. George Kennan when he visited the Siberian convict
settlements, even the horrors of the exile were as nothing compared to
the awful journey on foot across the desolate steppes of Russia.

All this will soon be at an end, and the nearness of the prisons to
civilization will perhaps remove some of the abuses and ill-treatment of
the prisoners now practised in the far-away Siberian prisons.

If the young Czar Nicholas continues his kindly and humane methods of
government it is likely that he will soon need very few political
prisons.

He has shown much kindness and clemency to his people since he came to
the throne, and there is little doubt that his subjects will soon learn
to love him and trust him in return.

       *       *       *       *       *

The relations between the Transvaal and England are again being brought
prominently before the world.

Early in the spring, when it was rumored that Germany was taking too
friendly an interest in the affairs of the Transvaal, Mr. Chamberlain,
the Colonial Secretary of England, sent a very stormy letter to the
Boers, saying that England insisted that the Transvaal should not make
any foreign alliances without her consent, and that the treaty between
the Transvaal and Great Britain, which is known as the "London Treaty,"
must be very closely observed.

To this the Boer Government replied that it would be glad to arbitrate
that point as well as the amount of the payment to be made for the
Jameson raid; and the various other points on which the two governments
were at issue.

Soon after this Dr. Leyds, President Krueger's confidential agent,
arrived in England, and had a conference with Mr. Chamberlain. They
appeared to come to satisfactory understanding, and there was every
prospect of a peaceful settlement to the dispute.

Some weeks after this conversation with Dr. Leyds, Mr. Chamberlain was
asked by the House of Commons whether he had consented to arbitrate with
the Transvaal.

Mr. Chamberlain answered that some points would certainly be submitted
to arbitration, but the question, of the Transvaal's right to allow a
foreign country to befriend her could not be so treated, because it was
expressly stated in the London convention that England had sovereign
rights in the Transvaal, and could therefore insist on her wishes being
carried out.

When the news of Mr. Chamberlain's speech reached Pretoria, the capital
of the Transvaal, there was great indignation among the Boers. The
matter was debated by the Volksraad or Parliament, and several members
declared that Great Britain must be shown that she no longer had any
sovereign rights in the Transvaal.

Meetings were held denouncing Mr. Chamberlain's remarks, and finally
President Krueger delivered a speech before the Volksraad which caused
considerable excitement, as its meaning was an open defiance of
England.

In this speech President Krueger stated that the Boers were perfectly
willing to abide by the London convention, but he stated emphatically
that the convention did not contain a word about the sovereign rights of
England, and since it had been made, all such rights had ceased to
exist.

The London convention was made in 1884.

In 1881, after the British forces had been beaten by the Boers, a treaty
was made by which peace was restored, and the Transvaal recognized as a
semi-independent republic, under the sovereignty of England.

In this treaty it was understood that the Boers would have freedom of
government as far as their home affairs went, but that no friendships or
alliances could be made with foreign powers. The British Government
reserved for itself the right of managing the foreign affairs of the
Transvaal.

This was in 1881.

In 1884 a new agreement was entered into which expressly stated that
England no longer wanted these rights, and that the Transvaal was free
to govern the country without interference, and to manage its own
foreign affairs as it pleased. One right only did England demand, and
that was that the Transvaal should not make any treaty with a foreign
country without the approval of the Queen.

It stated that the Transvaal Government must send her Majesty a copy of
any treaty it desired to make, and that if England notified the Boers
within six months that the proposed treaty interfered with her rights in
South Africa, it must be abandoned. Nothing was said in this agreement
which prevented the Transvaal from having friendly dealings with
foreign powers.

Mr. Chamberlain seems to have become confused about the contents of the
London convention of 1884, and to have got it mixed with the treaty of
1881. The brave old President of the Transvaal has, however, determined
to refresh his memory.

In his speech before the Volksraad he stated grimly that the Boers would
oppose to the last any attempt on the part of England to enforce her
fancied rights, and having declared himself emphatically for war, he
concluded with one of his quaint, pious remarks. He said the Boers
wished to preserve peaceful and friendly relations with the whole world,
because wherever love dwelt the blessing of God was sure to follow.

President Krueger's defiance was regarded by the British Government as
mere speech-making. The Government refused to believe that the old man
wished his words to be taken seriously, and so passed the whole affair
over as unworthy of notice.

Mr. Chamberlain has been instructed to enforce Great Britain's sovereign
rights in the Transvaal, and notwithstanding the fact that several of
the London newspapers are calling attention to the treaty of 1884, he is
determined to insist on these rights.

It was rumored some time ago that as soon as the Greek troubles were out
of the way, Germany, France, and Russia would take up the Transvaal
question.

This may perhaps be the reason why the Boer President so bravely defies
the British Government, and if Mr. Chamberlain tries to force the
Transvaal to submit, he may find that he has to reckon with these three
powerful countries as well as the handful of Dutchmen in the South
African Republic.

       *       *       *       *       *

A terrible tragedy has occurred in Pennsylvania at a place called
Hazleton, about twenty-five miles from Wilkesbarre.

Some miners were shot and killed by order of the sheriff of the county.

These miners were out on strike, their strike, however, not being in any
way connected with the great coal strike of which we have told you in
previous numbers.

These men were dissatisfied because an extra two-hours' work was forced
upon them every day without extra pay.

Some mules which had formerly been stationed in another colliery were
changed over to the one at which these men were employed, and the care
of these animals occupied the drivers an extra hour morning and night,
which the miners resented. They therefore struck work.

Two of the drivers did not wish to join in the strike, and the
superintendent, seeing this, did his best to persuade all the men to go
to work. Upon this the strikers became angry, and bitter words and hard
feeling resulted.

Thinking themselves badly used, the men resolved to try and make the
strike general in the neighborhood, and began marching from colliery to
colliery, urging the men at work to lay down their picks and join them.

The strikers have been very orderly, and have made no disturbance of any
kind, but as they were principally foreigners who are ignorant of our
laws and customs, it was thought best to have men on hand ready to check
them if they attempted any lawless act. The sheriff of Luzerne County,
in which Hazleton is situated, was therefore notified to be on the
alert, and in his turn sent word to his deputies to be ready for action.

The sheriff of a county is a very important officer. It is his duty to
see that law and order are preserved within the limits of his county,
that the penalties ordered by the judges are carried out, and to
suppress all riots and uprisings in his district.

To assist him in this work he has the right to call on as many citizens
as he needs for the business in hand. These men he binds by an oath to
aid him in the discharge of his duty and to help him to preserve the
peace. They compose what is known as the sheriff's posse, and are a body
of men who accompany him and help him to do his duty.

Sheriff Martin, of Luzerne County, called out about ninety deputies for
his posse, and had them in the vicinity of Hazleton for over a week
before the shooting occurred.

On the day of the tragedy a body of the strikers had determined to march
to Lattimer, a village not very far away from Hazleton. They desired to
persuade the miners there to join their ranks, and started out about two
hundred and fifty strong, marching in a peaceable and orderly manner
along the road. None of them were armed, and none showed the slightest
desire for violence or riot.

They had arrived within a few hundred yards of their destination when
their road was blocked by the sheriff and his posse.

Advancing toward them, the sheriff ordered them to go back to their
homes, telling them that they were creating a disturbance and were
acting in defiance of the law.

Most of the strikers were foreigners, and, failing to understand what
the sheriff said, the foremost men crowded round him, trying to prove to
him that they were only parading, and had a perfect right to march
through the streets if they only remained peaceful and orderly.

Unfortunately the sheriff could not make out what they meant, and
supposed they were defying him.

He therefore proceeded to read them the Riot Act.

This is an act which in the name of the commonwealth orders the persons
assembled to disperse and go to their homes.

If the rioters fail to obey they are liable to imprisonment and
punishment according to the laws of the State, and the sheriff or person
authorized to read the Riot Act is bound to arrest all persons who
linger around after the act has been read to them.

When a riot has assumed such a serious character that armed men have had
to be called out to subdue it, the Riot Act is generally read, and then
the soldiers or sheriff's deputies charge the mob, being careful not to
fire on them or wound them unless necessary in self-defence or in
performance of their duty.

In this instance the sheriff utterly misunderstood the rioters, and as
they crowded around him, trying to make out what it was that he was
reading to them, he lost his self-control, and imagining the men were
defying and threatening him, ordered his posse to fire.

It was a frightful affair. Ninety well-armed men firing into a crowd of
defenceless laborers. Twenty-three strikers were killed, thirty-six
seriously wounded, and about forty more injured.

As you may suppose, our whole country is mourning over this catastrophe.

It would seem difficult to find where the real blame lies. The sheriff
thought he was doing his duty, his posse but obeyed his orders, and the
poor sacrificed miners had no idea what the sheriff was reading to them,
nor any intention of offering violence.

The whole neighborhood became so excited over the affray that the
Governor of Pennsylvania immediately ordered some of the state troops to
Hazleton to prevent further trouble.

The sheriff and his posse are to be arrested and tried for killing the
strikers.

The Mayor of Hazleton declares that the shooting of the miners cannot be
excused; that if the rioters refused to go home after the Riot Act had
been read to them, the sheriff should have ordered his deputies to fire
over the heads of the mob; and then, if they still continued rebellious,
it was time to think about punishing them.

The Riot Act states that persons lingering one hour after the act has
been read shall be seized and arrested, and those who arrest them shall
not be held liable for any injuries the rioters may receive; but this is
only after an hour has elapsed. According to the accounts that have
reached us, the sheriff ordered his men to fire immediately after the
reading of the act.

The great coal strike is, however, at an end.

A fresh agreement has been offered, which both miners and owners have
decided to accept.

By it the men go to work at sixty-five cents per ton until January, when
a new scale of wages is to be used. This scale will be settled by
arbitration between this and January.

The masters and men are to meet in joint conference, and both sides
promise to abide by the decision of the arbitrators.

It is said that Mr. de Armitt will not pay the sixty-five-cent rate, but
will only give fifty-four cents till the new rate goes into effect in
January. The leaders have determined to continue the strike in his mines
if this report proves to be true, but in the other collieries the miners
will go to work.

                                                       G.H. ROSENFELD.




INVENTION AND DISCOVERY.


BICYCLE-HOLDER.-A clever invention comes to us from California. It is
called a bicycle-holder, and is designed for carrying bicycles on street
cars.

It is a simple device consisting of two hooks placed on an iron bar,
from the centre of which another bar depends which is also furnished
with a hook.

The wheel is hung on to the upper hooks, one of which passes through
each wheel. The lower hook is so adjusted that the hind wheel rests in
it, thus forming a perfect support for the machine.

It is possible to attach two bicycle-holders to the back of each car,
and if it works as well as it is expected to do, will be a great
convenience to wheel-men.

       *       *       *       *       *

ROAD MAP.--This is also a boon to bicyclists. The map, instead of
folding up to put in the pocket, is rolled on two small cylinders. With
the map comes a nickeled wire attachment which fits over the ends of the
cylinders and holds a portion of the map firmly extended.

In the centre of the wire holder is a loop which snaps on to the
handle-bar of the wheel and enables the rider to carry his map stretched
out before him ready for instant use.

As the rider proceeds farther on his journey he can twist the cylinders
and unroll a fresh portion of his map. It is an excellent device, and
one which can be adjusted to all bicycles.

       *       *       *       *       *

WRIST-GUIDE FOR PIANOS.-This is an attachment which can be fixed to any
piano, and is intended to show the learner just the right angle at which
the wrist should be held.

Children seem naturally to be flabby-wristed when they are trying to
learn to play, and to drop the wrists below the level of the keyboard
seems to be the chief aim and object of every young pianist.

Years ago there were not so many inventions for making learning
delightful to the young, and we distinctly remember the fierce battles
which used to take place at each music lesson over this very wrist
business.

As no wrist-guide had then been invented, necessity--which is the mother
of invention, they say--taught our instructress to make one of her own.
Hers was more simple than the present one, but probably even more
effective. It consisted of a pair of sharp-pointed scissors which
glistened ferociously under the learner's wrists, ready to give them a
sharp reminder whenever they flagged and showed a disposition to droop.

The piano was not as popular an instrument in those days as it has since
become.

This wrist-guide ought to save many tears and much vexation of spirit to
both teacher and pupil.




BOOKS RECEIVED.


We have received from the publishers, Thompson, Brown & Co., Boston, a
set of the Duntonian Vertical Writing-Books. This series is described by
the publishers as follows:

"This is a distinctly new series of Vertical Writing-Books, having some
special features of great teaching value. One of these is the specially
made paper with water-marked direction lines which pertains only to this
system, and by means of which a vertical hand can be much sooner
acquired. These lines are not intended in any way as guide-lines to be
carefully observed in writing the copy, but simply as a ready means of
verifying the work and determining whether the writer is conforming to a
practical vertical style or not."





NOTICE.


The attention of readers is called to the advertisement opposite the
first reading page of this number. This contest cannot fail to be
pleasant work, for to read through carefully the poem of Evangeline is a
treat in itself. We hope that many of our young friends will compete;
and if the proper sort of interest is shown in this contest, others will
follow it.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is
Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 46, September 23, 1897, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD AND ***

***** This file should be named 16024.txt or 16024.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/6/0/2/16024/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.(www.pgdp.net)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

