The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Nursery, No. 169, January, 1881, Vol.
XXIX, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Nursery, No. 169, January, 1881, Vol. XXIX
       A Monthly Magazine for Youngest Readers

Author: Various

Release Date: January 17, 2006 [EBook #17536]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NURSERY, NO. 169 ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Paul Ereaut and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





[Transcriber's note: As pages 23 and 24 were missing from the original
scanned booklet they were not included in this transcription.]


No. 169. JANUARY, 1881. Vol. XXIX.

THE NURSERY

A MONTHLY MAGAZINE FOR YOUNGEST READERS

NURSERY PUBLISHING COMPANY. 36 BROMFIELD STREET, BOSTON

$1.50 a year, in advance. 15 cents a single copy.

Entered at the Post Office at Boston as Second-Class Matter.

Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1880, by THE NURSERY
PUBLISHING CO., in the Office of the Librarian of Congress at
Washington.

       *     *     *     *     *

CONTENTS OF NUMBER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTY-NINE.

       *     *     *     *     *

                                                              PAGE

THAT MERRY CHRISTMAS              By _Uncle Charles_           2

BABY'S QUIET FAMILY               By _W.G._                    3

BABY AND THE BIRD                 By _A.B.C._                  4

A NEW YEAR'S DIALOGUE             By _Marian Douglas_          5

THE SHEEP FOLLOW THE SHEPHERD     By _Dora Burnside_           7

"A FRIEND IN NEED"                By _Jane Oliver_             8

"IN A MINUTE"                     By _Mary Addison_           10

THE CHRISTMAS-TREE                By _George S. Burleigh_     12

DOWN THE RIVER AFTER THE BOY      By _Alfred Stetson_         14

"FLUTTER, FLUTTER!"               By _Mary N. Prescott_       16

DRAWING-LESSON                    By _Harrison Weir_          17

CHRISTMAS BELLS                   By _George Cooper_          18

JACK THE MAGPIE                   By _Aunt Sadie_             19

PORTRAITS FOR LITTLE FOLKS        By _K.G._                   21

AMONG THE HOLLY-BUSHES            By _Emily Carter_           23 (Missing)

THE BASKET OF APPLES              By _Uncle Sam_              25

CHRISTMAS                         (_Music by T. Crampton_)    32

       *     *     *     *     *

A BRAIN AND NERVE FOOD.

Vitalized Phos-phites

(This differs from all other tonics because it is composed of the
nerve-giving principles of the ox brain and wheat germ.) It gives
vitality to the insufficient growth of children; feeds the brain and
nerves; prevents fretfulness; gives quiet rest and sleep. An ill-fed
brain learns no lessons, and is excusable if peevish. Restless infants
are cured in a few days. For sale by Druggists, or mail, $1.00.

=F. CROSBY 666 8TH AVE. N.Y.=

       *     *     *     *     *

EDITOR'S PORTFOLIO.

*** "The Nursery" is fortunate, not only in being in charge of its
original editors, but in retaining the good will and hearty co-operation
of its most valued contributors.

*** Among these the name of Marian Douglas deserves special mention. We
present a capital poem from her pen, and are promised a series of a
similar character, one of which will appear in each number during the
year. The name of George Cooper is also endeared to our readers by his
charming verses. A poem by him is given in this number, and we have
others in store. George S. Burleigh, Emily Carter, Jane Oliver, Mary N.
Prescott, and other favorites contribute to our table of contents.

*** Some choice things that came too late for this issue will appear in
future numbers. Poems by Mrs. M.D. Brine, illustrated by her sister,
Miss Northam, poems and sketches by Josephine Pollard, Clara Doty Bates,
and others, are among the treasures held in reserve.

=The Yearly Volume of "The Nursery" for 1880 is now ready. Sent by mail,
postpaid, for $1.75.=

Direct all communications to

=THE NURSERY PUBLISHING CO.,=

36 _Bromfield Street, Boston, Mass._




=_The Nursery_

1867-1881

A MONTHLY MAGAZINE FOR YOUNGEST READERS.=

       *     *     *     *     *

This unique and much-admired work, begun in 1867, and now a _welcome and
trusted visitor_ in every intelligent family where there is a child,
gives in _every number_ a profusion of

THE CHOICEST PICTURES,

Executed in the _best and most costly style_, and, in most cases, from
_original designs_ made expressly for the young.

ITS ARTICLES,

Whether in prose or verse, are adapted with the greatest care to the
capacities of children, and are, with very rare exceptions, wholly
original.

A SONG SET TO MUSIC,

By a skilful composer, and specially adapted to children's voices, is
given in every number.

       *     *     *     *     *

TERMS: =Subscription Price (postage included), $1.50. Payable always in
advance. 15 cents a single number. A Sample Number will be sent for 10
cents.= Address all communications to

THE NURSERY PUBLISHING CO.,

36 Bromfield Street, Boston, Mass.




THE NURSERY.

       *     *     *     *     *

WHAT THE PAPERS SAY OF IT.


If you would teach your child to read in the easiest, quickest, and most
practicable way, easiest both to the child and the teacher, put "The
Nursery" in its hands every month. Our word for it, you will be
surprised at the result. "The Nursery" will be found a primer, a
reading-book, drawing-book, story-book, and lesson-book, all in
one.--_Boston Transcript._

"The Nursery" is as great a favorite as ever; and all attempts to
imitate it have failed. No other magazine can supply its place. No
family where there are small children can afford to be without
it.--_Providence Press._

Among American periodicals for the young, there is not one that we can
more confidently commend than "The Nursery." Indeed, there is not one of
the kind in Europe that quite comes up to this.--_N.Y. Tribune._

Every house that has children in it needs "The Nursery" for their profit
and delight; and every childless house needs it for the sweet
portraiture it gives of childhood.--_Northampton Journal_.

"The Nursery" continues to be without a rival in its own field, and
fills its place so well that none need wish for anything better. The
idea that anything is good enough for the little ones finds no place in
the mind of its editor, and both stories and pictures are of the
choicest.--_Chicago Advance._

No better outlay of money can be made for children than in subscription
to such a magazine as "The Nursery," as it affords not only pleasure,
but real benefit.--_Richmond (Va.) Religious Herald._

We again repeat our hope that no family in this country, in which there
is a child or children, will be without this beautiful, simple, and
natural little magazine.--_Marshall (Mich.) Expounder._

Of the many attempts to imitate it, all have failed. We are proud of
such an American journal for children.--_Illinois Schoolmaster._

Teachers who have tried it say that it charms the children into learning
to read. Blessings on the sunny "Nursery"! Far and near may households
be brightened by its presence!--_Massachusetts Teacher._

A bright, pleasant little pictorial, with which the smallest children
able to read at all may be amused and instructed. Parents looking for
such reading will be interested in it.--_N.Y. Tribune._

"The Nursery" is the very best magazine that we know for children. It is
beautifully illustrated, and the stories are _always clean and pure_,
inculcating kindness to one another and to animals. Its lessons are all
in favor of truth, honor, and honesty. It should be in every family
where there are young children to be entertained and
instructed.--_Woman's Journal._

"The Nursery" is 'a magazine for youngest readers,' and, as we know by
its use in our own family, most admirably adapted for the purpose for
which it is intended.--_Charleston (S.C.) Carolinian._

Those who wish to furnish their little ones, just learning to read, with
something fresh,--something written with great care, and illustrated
with skill, to which the ordinary 'primers' cannot and do not
attain,--should provide themselves with "The Nursery."--_Detroit Post._

To those of our readers who have young children of their own, or who are
called on to suggest quiet amusement for little patients, we can
conscientiously commend "The Nursery," a monthly juvenile magazine
published in Boston, as the only periodical we have been able to find
suited to the comprehension of children under ten or twelve years of
age.--_N.Y. Medical Gazette._

We wish we could express in fitting words our gratitude to the editor,
publisher, and contributors of this exquisite little magazine. It is
intended for the small boys and girls who do not read very long words;
but, if we mistake not, 'children of a larger growth' will be fascinated
by its charming pictures and its dainty execution.--_N.Y. Liberal
Christian._

Few better services can be done than to banish namby-pamby trash from
juvenile literature, and to substitute for it what is healthy and jolly
and interesting. This is the work that "The Nursery" performs for little
children, and we therefore take pleasure in its deserved success.--_N.Y.
Independent._

[Illustration: THAT MERRY CHRISTMAS.]




THAT MERRY CHRISTMAS.


[Illustration: W]

What a glad noise there was that Christmas morning! The children had got
up early to look in their stockings. John's were not quite large enough
to hold all of his gifts. It is rather hard to crowd a sword, a gun, and
a rocking-horse all into one stocking.

Mary had a fine new doll. Harry had a box, and, on taking off the cover,
up sprang a wise-looking little man, with a cap on his head. Jessy had a
doll, and a very pretty one it was too. Tommy had a what-do-you-call-it.
Why did he look up the chimney? I think it was to see if there was any
sign of Santa Claus.

John mounted his horse, waved his sword, and held up his gun. But very
soon he began to get tired of them all. The thought came into his head
that he was more than eight years old. "What do I want of these toys?"
said he. "Why was I so silly as to choose them, when aunt Susan would
have given me a microscope?" And John laid down his sword and gun,
feeling quite above such childish things.

When aunt Susan came, she saw that John did not seem as glad over his
presents as the rest of the children did over theirs. "What is the
matter, John?" she asked. "Why are you not playing with your toys?"

"Aunt Susan," said John, "I wish I had taken the microscope. Is it too
late?"

"No, John. I thought you might repent your choice, so I said to Mr.
Grover, who keeps the toy-shop, 'I think I shall want to change the
microscope: can I do so?' He said, 'Yes.' His shop will be open till
eleven o'clock. So run round and get the microscope, and tell him to
send to-morrow and take back the toys."

In five seconds John had on his hat, and was running down the street to
Mr. Grover's. He came back with the microscope in about half an hour,
and was full of joy at the change. A merry Christmas it was then for all
the children!

UNCLE CHARLES.

       *     *     *     *     *

[Illustration: Baby's quiet family]




BABY'S QUIET FAMILY.

    Whenever I walk
      With my children three,
    I laugh and I talk
      For the whole family.

    There's Ruth (her arm's broken!)
      And Jane and Annette,
    They never have spoken
      Or laughed even, yet;

    But I know when they're glad,--
      Mothers always can tell,--
    And I'm sad when they're sad,
      For I love them so well!

    Whenever we walk,
      Though they're still as can be,
    I can easily talk
      Quite enough for the three.

W.G.




BABY AND THE BIRD.

[Illustration: BABY AND THE BIRD.]


Baby is looking out of the window. Jane is holding him up so that he
will not fall out. What does he see that makes him jump up and down with
joy?

He sees a dear little bird. It has come for its daily meal of seed and
crumbs. It is not afraid of baby? Why should it be? How could any bird
be afraid of such a dear child?

When the bird has had its dinner, I think it will sing.

A.B.C.




[Illustration: Chapter header]

A NEW YEAR'S DIALOGUE.


HARRY.


    Loud from the north the wild wind blows;
      It sweeps the blue sky clear,
    And parts, amid the drifting snows,
      The path of the New Year;
    The glad New Year that always brings
    So many bright delightful things,
      Gay holidays and merry plays,
    And loving wishes from our friends.
      A "Happy New Year" let us make,
    And keep it "happy" till it ends.
      By trying every day to see
      What good, good children we can be.

KATE.

    Last year, when any thing went wrong,
    I used to fret the whole day long,
    And sometimes sob and cry aloud,
    Dark-looking as a thunder-cloud;
    But, even in a gloomy place,
    I now must keep a sunny face;
    For, all this year, I mean to see
    How bright and cheerful I can be.

MARY.

    Last year, the flitting butterfly
    Was not so idle as was I;
    I liked my sports and frolic well,
    But would not learn to read and spell:
    Now I must change my ways at once,
    Or I shall surely be a dunce.
    This glad New Year that has begun,
    Must leave me wiser when 'tis done.

JAMES.

    Last year, my temper was so quick,
    My angry words came fast and thick,
    And brother Tom I'd scold and strike
    When he did what I did not like.
    I am so sorry! Loving words
    Are sweeter than the song of birds;
    And, all this year, I mean to see
    If I a gentle child can be.

ALL. (_Four or more._)

    The past is past; the year is new:
    We will be patient, brave, and true;
    When we are bidden, quick to mind;
    Unselfish, courteous, and kind;
    And try in every place to see
    What good, good children we can be.

MARIAN DOUGLAS.

[Illustration: Tail piece]




[Illustration: Chapter header]

THE SHEEP FOLLOW THE SHEPHERD.


The tenth chapter of St. John says, "He calleth his own sheep by name,
and leadeth them out. He goeth before them, and the sheep follow him;
for they know his voice. And a stranger will they not follow, but will
flee from him; for they know not the voice of strangers."

But may it not be the form or dress of the shepherd that the sheep
know, and follow him? To test this, a traveller, who had put the
question, once exchanged dresses with a shepherd, and went amongst the
sheep.

The traveller in the shepherd's dress called the sheep, and tried to
lead them; but "they knew not his voice," and did not move. But when the
shepherd called them, though he was in the traveller's dress, they ran
at once to him, thus proving that it was the voice that led them.

I have a dog that will sometimes bark at me when I put on an overcoat
which he has not seen me wear before. But, the moment he hears my voice,
he seems ashamed of not having known me, and will whine, as if he would
say, "Pardon me, good master. It was very stupid in me not to know you.
It was your coat I did not know. I will try to be wiser the next time."

DORA BURNSIDE

       *     *     *     *     *




"A FRIEND IN NEED."


Henry lived in the great city of London. He was known as "the boy at the
crossing." He used to sweep one of the crossings in Oxford Street. In
wet weather these crossings are very muddy. Now and then some one would
give him a penny for his work. He did not make much in a day; but what
he got was a great help to his mother. That thought kept him daily at
his work. One day he saw a little girl trying to lead her little brother
across the street. The carts and the horses made her afraid, and she ran
back timidly.

"What's the matter, little girl?" asked Henry.

"I am afraid we shall be run over," said the girl.

"I'll help you across," said Henry. Then, lifting the little boy in his
arms, he took the girl by the hand, and led her safely to the other side
of the street.

[Illustration: A friend in need.]

"Thank you!" said the little girl; and "Thank you!" said her little
brother, as plainly as he could speak it.

I went up and asked the boy with the broom if he knew the children. "I
never saw them before in my life," said he; "but such little ones can't
get across without help."

"You are a good boy," said I. "I think you must have a good father."

"I had one once," said he; "but now I have only a good mother."

"Well, Henry," said I, "give her this shilling, and tell her I send it
to her for teaching her boy to do good when he can get a chance."

Tears came to the boy's eyes. A shilling seemed a good deal of money to
him, and it pleased him all the more because it was given him for his
mother.

"Thank you, sir; thank you!" said he, and he ran back to his work one of
the happiest boys in London, I think, at that moment.

JANE OLIVER.

       *     *     *     *     *




"IN A MINUTE."


If you asked Dora to do any thing, she would reply, "In a minute." It
was a bad habit she had. "Dora, please bring me a drink of water."--"In
a minute."--"Dora, go up stairs, and bring me down my comb."--"Yes,
mother, in a minute."--"Dora, come to your dinner."--"In a minute."

One day the bird was hopping about on the floor. Somebody went out,
leaving the door open, just as "somebody" is always doing. Dora's mother
said, "Dora, shut the door, or the cat will be after your bird."

"Yes, mother, in a minute," said Dora. "I just want to finish this line
in my drawing." But the cat did not wait till this was done. In he
popped, and with one dart he had the bird in his mouth.

Down went the slate on the floor, and away went cat, bird, and Dora.
There was a wild chase on the lawn. "In a minute" Dora came back
weeping, with the poor bird in her hand, but, oh! the life had all been
shaken out of him.

[Illustration: Dora and the bird.]

How Dora cried! Mamma was sorry for her, but said, "A great many things
may happen 'in a minute,' Dora. I hope the next time you are told to do
a thing, you will do it at once."

MARY ADDISON.




THE CHRISTMAS TREE

[Illustration: THE CHRISTMAS TREE]


    Spring and Summer and russet Fall
      Come and go with a varied cheer;
    Each has something, and none has all,
      Of the good things of the year.

    Winter laughs, though the trees are bare,
      With a kindly laugh that is good to see;
    For of all the forest is none so rare
      As his merry Christmas-tree.

    It blooms with many a taper's flame;
      And hidden under the leaves of green
    Are fruits of every shape and name,
      The funniest ever seen,--

[Illustration: Another Christmas Tree]

    Book and bundle, and scarf, and shawl,
      Picture and peanuts, skate and saw,
    Candy and album, and bat and ball,
      Hatchet, and doll, and taw,

    Games and frames, and comical dames
      With walnut faces wrinkled and old,
    Fillets rare for the sunny hair,
      And jewels of pearl and gold.

    For the good St. Nicholas blest this tree,
      And it blooms and bears for every one,
    With a gift of love to you and me,
      For beauty, or use, or fun.

    Poorer than any the Child whose name
      Has given a name to our Christmas-tree;
    Yet kingly gifts to his cradle came,
      And kingly gifts gave He.

GEORGE S. BURLEIGH.




DOWN THE RIVER AFTER THE BOY.


Walter Dale was a little boy six years old, who lived with his parents
on the bank of the River Thames in England. One day, after dinner, he
went to the water's edge to play.

Seeing a small boat tied to a big stone by a rope, he pulled the boat up
to the shore. "What a nice little boat!" said he. "I will get into it,
and rock it, as I once saw a big boy do."

So he got into the boat, and began to rock it. The boat got loose, and
drifted down the river. Walter did not notice this until he was quite a
distance from the shore; then, turning round, he saw what had happened.
Every moment the current was carrying him further from home.

Walter was not a timid boy, and, instead of crying, he began to reason
in this way: "The boat does not leak. It is safe and sound. There are no
waves to make me afraid. The wind does not blow. Here on a seat is a
thick blanket. In this box is a loaf of bread and a knife. The water of
the river is good to drink, and here is a tin mug. I think I will not
cry, but hope for the best."

So he sat down. He called to some people on the shore; but they did not
hear him. He stood up, and waved his hat to a man in a passing boat, and
cried, "Help, help!" But the man thought it was some little fellow
making fun of him.

Meanwhile Walter's mother had become anxious. She ran down to the river,
and followed his foot-tracks to the edge of the water. Then she ran back
to her husband; but he was not in the house. In about an hour he came
back, and she said, "Quick, quick! Get a boat, and call John to help
you. Walter is drifting down the river in that little green boat, I am
sure."

Mr. Dale ran out of the house, called his man John, and they went down
to the bank. Here they took a good fast boat, pulled it out into the
stream, and began to row with the current.

It was getting late. A mist was creeping over the great city of London.
They could hardly see the tall stores, the masts and steeples on one
side. But on they went, rowing swiftly with their good oars, as if for
dear life.

[Illustration: Searching for Walter.]

They looked out sharply on both sides to catch a sight of the little
green boat. At last, when they had rowed about two miles, with the tide
in their favor, Mr. Dale cried out, "I see it! I see it! But, ah! it is
empty. I see no sign of a boy in it. What can have become of poor
Walter?"

On they rowed, and at last, came up with the boat. Still no Walter was
to be seen. The poor father was in despair, when all at once Walter
started up from under the great blanket, where he had been hiding. He
cried out, "Here I am, papa, safe and sound!"

"Oh, you little rogue! Come here and let me pull your ears!" They all
got back to their home in time for a late tea, which mother had kept
warm for them. Walter was kissed and then cuffed; but the cuffs were so
tender, that they made him laugh even more than the kisses.

ALFRED STETSON.

       *     *     *     *     *




"FLUTTER, FLUTTER!"


    Flutter, flutter, with never a stop,
    All the leaves have begun to drop;
    While the wind, with a skip and a hop,
    Goes about gathering in his crop.

    Flutter, flutter, on bustling-wings,
    All the plump little feathered things:
    Thrush and bobolink, finch and jay,
    Follow the sun on his holiday.

    Flutter, flutter, the snowflakes all
    Jostle each other in their fall.
    Crowd and push into last year's nest,
    And hide the seeds from robin-redbreast.

    Flutter, flutter, the hours go by;
    Nobody sees them as they fly;
    Nobody hears their fairy tread,
    Nor the rustle of their wings instead.

MARY N. PRESCOTT.




[Illustration: DRAWING-LESSON.]




CHRISTMAS BELLS

[Illustration: CHRISTMAS BELLS.]


    "Are you waking?" shout the breezes
      To the tree-tops waving high,
    "Don't you hear the happy tidings
      Whispered to the earth and sky?
    Have you caught them in your dreaming,
      Brook and rill in snowy dells?
    Do you know the joy we bring you
      In the merry Christmas bells?
      Ding, dong! ding, dong, Christmas bells!

    "Are you waking, flowers that slumber
      In the deep and frosty ground?
    Do you hear what we are breathing
      To the listening world around?
    For we bear the sweetest story
      That the glad year ever tells:
    How He loved the little children,--
      He who brought the Christmas bells!
      Ding, dong! ding, dong, Christmas bells!

GEORGE COOPER.




JACK THE MAGPIE.


One day last summer, a man in Colorado found a magpie by the roadside.
Its wings had been clipped, so that it could not fly. The man gave it to
a little boy named Ernest Hart.

He lived with his parents in a neat cottage near by a mountain stream.
He ran home, and showed the bird to his sister Edith. They named it
Jack.

Jack was quite a large bird. His body was black as coal; his breast was
white; and his wings and tail shaded off into a dark green. His bill was
long and very strong. He had a shrewd, knowing look. As he was quite
tame, he must have been some one's pet.

He would hop and strut around in such a funny, pompous way, that one
could not help laughing. He would take food from any one's hand, but
would not let any one touch him, except Mr. Hart, the children's father.

To Mr. Hart he seemed to take a great liking. He would hop on to his
hand or shoulder: he would follow him all over the place. As soon as Mr.
Hart came into the house, Jack would stand outside the door, and scream
to him to come out. Indeed, Jack was almost too fond of him.

One day when Mr. Hart was chopping wood, Jack kept laying his bill
within two or three inches of the place where the axe fell. It seemed
just as if he wanted his bill chopped off.

Jack could talk a little. He could say "pretty," "what," and "yes, sir."
When hungry, he would come round to the kitchen-door. There he would
keep up a loud chattering, till food was given him to eat.

Jack was shy of Marcus, the dog. But, while Marcus was eating his
dinner, Jack would steal up, and seize a bone from the plate. Then he
would run off and hide it.

I believe that all magpies are thieves. I know that Jack was a sad
thief. He would carry off almost any thing he saw lying about. One day
he was caught in the act of carrying off the gardener's pipe.

It was fun for Ernest and Edith to watch him at his mischief. All summer
they made much of him. Now, in October, though the trees are still green
and the wild flowers are not gone, we have had in our Colorado home a
taste of winter.

[Illustration: Jack the magpie and the dog.]

The ground has been white with snow. Jack is still with us, and seems
quite happy. Edith and Ernest may stay here all winter. Perhaps I may
tell you something of their winter sports. Would you like to hear it?

AUNT SADIE.




PORTRAITS FOR LITTLE FOLKS.


[Illustration: Master Baby]

    This is Master Baby,
      Paying a morning call,
    Sitting so good upon his chair,
      But speaking not at all.
    Listening to every word,
      The funny little man!
    Wondering at the news he hears,
      Thinking all he can.

[Illustration: Miss Mary Vernon]

    This little lady,
      I'd have you know,
    Is Miss Mary Vernon,
      With cheeks in a glow.
    She has a doll Bella,
      Quite dear to her heart,
    And takes her to ride
      In a nice little cart.

[Illustration: Tommy Trip]

    This is Tommy Trip:
      Bubbles he can blow;
    When a bubble breaks too soon,
      Tommy cries, "Don't go!"
    Older folks I know,
      Who their fine schemes make,
    And, when any fine scheme fails,
      Cry, "Oh, do not break!"

[Illustration: Susan]

    'Tis the winter cold,
      All the ponds are ice;
    Susan loves the winter cold,
      Calls the weather nice.
    Warm with muff and coat,
      She can go and skate;
    She can glide along the ice
      At a merry rate.

[Illustration: Mary Jane]

    This is Mary Jane,
      See! she has a saucer:
    To her cat she says,
      "Give me up your paw, sir.
    I've some fresh, nice milk
      You will relish greatly."
    Pussy then put up her paw;
      All this happened lately.

[Illustration: Baby May]

    This is Baby May:
      She looks out to spy
    If her own dear papa comes
      On the road near by.
    Yes, she sees him now,
      He is coming fast;
    For he loves his Baby May,
      Loves her first and last.

K.G.




THE BASKET OF APPLES.

[Illustration: THE BASKET OF APPLES.]


I.

Albert is a bright little fellow. He is not three years old; but he can
read ten words in "The Nursery." These words are, cat, dog, cow, horse,
bird, mother, father, brother, sister, apple.

One day, John the gardener left a basket of apples at the top of the
garden-steps. Albert saw it, and knew it was meant for the house. "I
will take it in," said he. "I am strong."

[Illustration: Albert II]


II.

But the basket was not so light as he had thought. Indeed it was quite
heavy. Perhaps this was because it was full of apples. The gardener had
just picked them from a fine old tree in the orchard.

Albert was a stout little fellow; but the basket was too much for him.
In trying to lift it, he upset it; and some of the apples rolled out
down the steps as fast as they could go. Perhaps they saw it was a good
chance to run away.

[Illustration: Albert III]


III.

Albert did not cry. He knew that crying would do no good. What was now
the first thing to be done? Albert thought for a while, and said to
himself, "The first thing to do is to set the basket upright."

He did not find it hard work to do this. All the apples had not run out.
Some were still in the basket.

Albert picked up one, smelt of it, and then put it back. He next placed
the basket upright.

[Illustration: Albert IV]


IV.

Having done this so that the basket stood firm, he said, "What is the
next thing to do? The next thing to do is to put back the apples; and I
am the boy that can do it."

And he did it well. He did not once think of keeping any of the apples
for himself; nor did he even take a bite of one of them. He was a good
boy, and too honest for that.

If any one had said to him, "Give me an apple," Albert would have said,
"The apples are not mine to give."

[Illustration: Albert V]


V.

"Now it is all right again," said Albert. "What next? If the basket will
not let me carry it, the basket shall carry me. That would be fair
play."

So he mounted the basket, as you see, took hold of the handle with his
left hand, and cried out, "Get up, sir!" He made believe it was a horse.
"Get up, sir!" he cried. But the horse would not move.

[Illustration: Albert VI]


VI.

Albert then began to shake the basket, as if to urge it on. Ah, me! who
would have thought to see it play the gay horse in earnest? It seemed so
gentle!

Who would have thought to see it shy, and kick up, and throw Albert off?
But so it did. Albert put out both hands to save himself, but he could
not keep his seat. Over he went.

[Illustration: Albert VII]


VII.

Over went the basket. Albert, apples, and all rolled down the steps.
"Help!" he cried. The gardener ran up to see what was the matter.

"Where are my apples?" said he. "Here!" said Albert, jumping up, for the
lucky rogue was not hurt a bit.

UNCLE SAM.




CHRISTMAS.

Words by ALFRED SELWYN.[A]

Music by T. CRAMPTON.

[Illustration: Music]

1.

  Christmas is coming, ho, ho, and ho, ho!
  Now bring on your holy and do not move slow;
  We'll deck the whole house with the branches so green,
  On wall and on picture the leaves shall be seen.
  Oh! merry the time when we all meet together
  In spite of the cold, the wind, and the weather,
  When grandparents, uncles, and cousins we see,
  All gather'd around the mahogany tree.


2.

  It stands in the hall, the mahogany tree;
  And very nice fruit it will bear, you'll agree;
  The turkeys and capons, the puddings and pies,
  On Christmas day feed something more than the eyes.
  The poor and the needy then come to our door,
  And carry off with them a bountiful store
  Of all the good things that we have for ourselves,
  In cupboard and cellar, on table and shelves.


3.

  When dinner is ended, what sound do we hear
  From holly-deck'd parlor ring merry and clear?
  'Tis Uncle Tom's fiddle! the tune is a call
  To all the good people to come to our ball.
  They come, young and old, and partake of our cheer,
  For old Christmas comes only once in a year!
  Then hand up the holly, and let us prepare
  The house for the pleasure in which all can share.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote A: Nursery, Vol. XXIV.]




=The best Holiday Gift for a Child is a Subscription to "The Nursery."=

_ADVERTISEMENTS_.

[Illustration: ADVERTISEMENTS]

GOLD MEDAL, PARIS, 1878. =BAKER'S Breakfast Cocoa.=

Warranted _absolutely pure Cocoa_, from which the excess of oil has been
removed. It is a delicious drink, nourishing and strengthening; easily
digested; admirably adapted for invalids as well as persons in health.

Sold by Grocers everywhere. =W. BAKER & CO.,= _Dorchester, Mass_.

       *     *     *     *     *

50 All Gold, Chromo, & Lit'g Cards, (no 2 Alike), name on, 10c. Clinton
Bros., Clintonville, Ct.

HOLIDAY PRESENTS.=--Young people make money very fast for Holiday
purposes selling =Chinese Laundry Bluing= Sheets. _Splendid article._
Double your money. 3 samples & agency secured for 3c. stamp. =Marlboro
Chemical W'ks, Marlboro, Ms.=

       *     *     *     *     *

50 Finest Chromo, Gilt & Colored Scroll Cards ever sold only 10c. Agts.
samples, 10c. G.A. Spring, Northford, Ct.

       *     *     *     *     *

50 All Lithographed Gold, Floral, & Motto Cards, No 2 alike, 10c. Agts.
Mammoth Outfit. 10c. Globe Card Co. Northford, Ct.

       *     *     *     *     *

20 Chromo Cards, no 2 alike, Lock. 10c. with name, postpaid. Samps
taken. J.B. Husted, Nassau, N.Y.

       *     *     *     *     *

[Illustration: Eureka Silk. Every Spool Warranted]

=BEST IN THE WORLD for Hand and MACHINE Sewing.=

       *     *     *     *     *

=THE VOICE,=

Official organ Music Teachers' National Association, is devoted to voice
culture in Singing, Reading and Speaking; tells how to treat

=STUTTERING,=

Stammering and other vocal defects: contains letters from Speech
Sufferers, biographical sketches of Musicians, Elocutionists and
Orators, the history of and essays on Music, hints on

=ELOCUTION,=

Articles on Spelling Reform, and translations of German and French
methods and writings, explains principles and utility of

=VISIBLE SPEECH.=

Published monthly, $1 a year; single copy, 10c. Send for prospectus.
Address, EDGAR S. WERNER, ALBANY, N.Y.

       *     *     *     *     *

=Readings! Recitations! Elocution!

100 CHOICE SELECTIONS

No. 18 NOW READY

P. GARRETT & CO.

708 Chestnut St., Philadelphia.=

This number is uniform with the Series, and contains another HUNDRED
splendid =Declamations= and =Readings,= combining =Sentiment, Oratory,
Pathos, Humor, Fun. 180pp.= Price, =30 cts.=, mailed free. Sold by
Booksellers. Every boy who speaks pieces, every member of a Lyceum who
wants =Something New= to recite, should =Get the Whole Set=. Club rates,
and =Full List of Contents Free.=

       *     *     *     *     *

=KNABE

PIANO FORTES.

Fifty Years before the Public=

Upon their excellence alone have attained an

=UNPURCHASED PRE-EMINENCE=

Which establishes them as unequalled in

TONE, TOUCH, WORKMANSHIP & DURABILITY.

=WAREROOMS: 113 Fifth Avenue, New York. 204 & 206 W Baltimore St.,
Baltimore.=

       *     *     *     *     *

[Illustration: VICK'S ILLUSTRATED FLORAL GUIDE.]

=VICK'S ILLUSTRATED FLORAL GUIDE. 1881.=

Is an Elegant Book of 100 Pages, One Colored Flower Plate, and 600
Illustrations, with Descriptions of the best Flowers and Vegetables, and
how to grow them. Sent free, by mail, 10 cents. In English or German.

Vick's Seeds are the best in the world. The Floral Guide will tell how
to get and grow them.

=Vick's Illustrated Monthly Magazine=--32 pages, fine illustrations, and
colored plate in every number. Price $1.25 a year. Five copies for
$5.00. Specimen numbers sent for 10 cents; 3 trial copies for 25 cts.

Address =JAMES VICK, Rochester, N.Y.=

       *     *     *     *     *

[Illustration: HANFORD'S NONE SUCH BAKING POWDER.]

=Absolutely Pure.=

Composed of Grape Cream Tarter and Bicarbonate Soda. Contains =nothing
else=. Full weight. Forfeited if not as represented. _All other kinds_
have filling. Sample and test to detect filling free by mail. In cans
only.

GEO. C. HANFORD, Syracuse, N.Y.

[Symbol: Pointing hand] A pound Can, prepaid, 60 cts, to any address.

ADVERTISEMENTS.

$66 a week in your own town. Terms and $5 outfit free. H. HALLETT & CO.,
Portland, Maine.

       *     *     *     *     *

[Illustration: A key that will wind any watch] AND NOT WEAR OUT.

       *     *     *     *     *

SOLD by Watchmakers. By mail. 30 cts. Circulars FREE. J.S. BIRCH & CO.,
38 Dey St., N.Y.

       *     *     *     *     *

$5 to $20 per day at home. Samples worth $5 free. Address STINSON & CO.,
PORTLAND, MAINE.

       *     *     *     *     *

INVALID ROLLING CHAIR. (RECLINING)

[Illustration: INVALID ROLLING CHAIRS.]

A Priceless boon to those who are unable to walk. Hon. A.H. Stephens,
M.C., and hundreds of others use them. Send for Circular to FOLDING
CHAIR CO., New Haven, Conn.

       *     *     *     *     *

$72 A WEEK. $12 a day at home easily made. Costly outfit free. Address
TRUE & CO., Augusta, Me.

       *     *     *     *     *

AGENTS WANTED EVERYWHERE to sell the best =Family Knitting Machine= ever
invented. We knit a pair of stockings, with HEEL and TOE complete, in 20
minutes. It will also knit a great variety of fancywork for which there
is always a ready market. Send for circular and terms to the ='Twombly
Knitting Machine Co.,= 409 Washington St., Boston, Mass.

       *     *     *     *     *

=Please Show your copy of

THE NURSERY

to all your friends, and ask them to subscribe for it at once. Get up a
Club.=

       *     *     *     *     *

=If you want a large, live, 16-page, illustrated, religious, family,
temperance paper, free= from sectarianism, politics, controversy, pious
novels, continued stories, advertisements, puffs, pills, and whisky
bitters; opposing rum, tobacco, infidelity, and the devil; containing
pictures, _true_ stories, incidents, providences, answers to prayer,
poetry, music, temperance, religion, and common sense; fine paper, large
type, and good reading for young and old; send $1 for THE CHRISTIAN and
25 cts. for the LITTLE CHRISTIAN a year. Both papers sent 3 months for
10 cts. Size 33 by 46 inches, containing 4 papers in one, The Christian,
Armory, Safeguard, and Common People. Specimens free. =Splendid premium
list.= Organs and hundreds of other premiums to canvassers. =Agents
wanted everywhere. Mr. Spurgeon said,= _"The Christian is the best paper
that is to me."_ =D.L. Moody said:= _"About the best paper in the
country."_ =George Muller said:= _"I like The Christian for its uniform
soundness."_ Address H.L. HASTINGS, Publisher, 47 Cornhill, Boston,
Mass.

       *     *     *     *     *

Cheapest and Best Supplementary Reading for Primary Schools!

We call the attention of School Committees, Teachers, and others to

=The Child's Reader.=

We have 30 different numbers. Each number contains 16 pages. Large type.
Richly illustrated. Send stamp for specimen. Address

THE NURSERY PUBLISHING CO., 36 Bromfield Street, Boston, Mass.

       *     *     *     *     *

PRETTY PAPER FOR PAPER DOLLS. Send 15 cents, and get 20 varieties by
mail. THE NURSERY, 36 Bromfield Street, Boston, Mass.

       *     *     *     *     *

ORGANS $30 to $1000; 2 to 32 Stops PIANOS $125 up. Paper free. Daniel F.
Beatty. Washington, N.J.

       *     *     *     *     *

The Bound Volumes of "The Nursery" for 1880 are now ready. $1.75
postpaid.

       *     *     *     *     *

=Choicest Books for Children=

=SUPERBLY ILLUSTRATED.=

=Bound Volumes of "The Nursery."=--Half-Yearly Volumes, $1.00; yearly,
$1.75 =The Beautiful Book.=--A collection of the choicest Poems ... $.75
=The Easy Book.=--In large Old English Type. Full cloth, .75;
half-cloth, .50 =The Nursery Primer.=--A superb book of 64 pages,
elegantly bound, .30 =The Nursery Reader.=--Nos. 1, 2, and 3, each .30
="The Nursery" for Primary Schools.=--Nos. 1, 2, 3, and 4, each, .30
=Nursery Stories in Prose and Rhyme= 1.00

_Sent postpaid, on receipt of price, by_

THE NURSERY PUBLISHING CO., 36 Bromfield Street, Boston, Mass.




=THE NURSERY.

PREMIUM-LIST FOR 1881.=


=For Two Subscribers and $3.00,= we will give any one of the following
articles:--any Half-Yearly Volume of The Nursery, Oxford's Junior
Speaker, The Easy Book, The Beautiful Book, an English Pocket Bible
(gilt clasp), any book worth $1.00, a Rubber Pencil Case with gold tips,
a Silver Fruit Knife, a Pocket Tool-Holder, a beautiful Wallet, a Toy
Cannon, a Box of Alphabet Blocks, a nice Pocket-Knife, a Dissected Map
of the United States, a Checker-Board, Gold Sleeve Buttons, Ladies'
Cuff-Pins.


=For Three Subscribers and $4.50,= we will give any one of the
following: any Yearly Volume of The Nursery, Oxford's Senior Speaker,
Sargent's Original Dialogues, a nice gilt Shakspeare, any one of the
Standard Poets, any book worth $1.50, a Backgammon-Board, a Travelling
Bag, a Microscope.


=For Four Subscribers and $6.00,= we will give any one of the following:
a superb English Bible (extra gilt), Webster's Dictionary, any one of
the Household Edition of the Poets, (Longfellow, Tennyson, Whittier,
etc.), any book worth $2.00, a beautiful Photograph Album, Six Plated
Tea Spoons, a Gold Ring.

       *     *     *     *     *

=Any other article transmissible by mail may be selected as a premium,
its value being in proportion to the number of subscribers sent. Thus,
we will give for Two Subscribers, at $1.50 each, an article worth $1.00;
for Three, an article worth $1.50; for Four, an article worth, $2.00;
and so on. But take notice that this is not an offer to give money.

Books for Premiums may be selected from any publisher's catalogue, and
we can always supply them at catalogue prices. Under this offer,
subscriptions to any periodical or newspaper are included.=

       *     *     *     *     *

Take notice that our offers of premiums apply only to subscriptions paid
at the full price: viz., $1.50 a year. We do not offer premiums for
subscriptions supplied at club-rates. We offer no premiums for _one_
subscription only. We offer no premiums in money.

Do not wait to make up the whole list before sending. Send the
subscriptions as you get them, stating that they are to go to your
credit for a premium; and, when your list is completed, select your
premium, and it will be forthcoming.

Remittances may be made with absolute safety by Postal Money Order, or
by a Bank Check on Boston, New York, or Philadelphia. Money may be sent
by mail without much risk. Postage Stamps may be used for odd change.
Letters can be Registered at any Post Office. _All remittances are at
the risk of the sender_. Direct all communications to

=THE NURSERY PUBLISHING CO.,= 36 _Bromfield Street, Boston, Mass_.




THE NURSERY

TERMS----1881.


=SUBSCRIPTIONS.=--$1.50 a year, in advance. Two copies for $2.75 a year;
three for $3.50; four for $4.50; five for $5.50; six for $6.00; each
additional copy $1.00, always in advance. Subscriptions received for any
period not less than six months.

=A Single Number= will be mailed for 15 cents.

=Volumes= begin with January and July. Subscriptions may commence with
any month, but unless the time is specified, will date from the
beginning of the current volume.

=Back Numbers= can always be supplied. THE MAGAZINE COMMENCED JAN.,
1867.

=Bound Volumes,= each containing the numbers for six months, will be
sent by mail, postpaid, for $1.00 per volume; yearly volumes for $1.75.

=Covers= for half-yearly volumes, postpaid, 35 cents; covers for yearly
volume, 40 cents.

=Prices Of Binding.=--In the regular half-yearly volume, 40 cents; in
one yearly volume (12 Nos. in one), 50 cents. If the volumes are to be
returned by mail, add 10 cents for the half-yearly, and 15 cents for the
yearly volume, to pay postage.

=Remittances= should be made, if possible, by Bank-check or Postal
money-order. Currency by mail is at the risk of sender. Postage Stamps
may be used as currency.

=Notice to Subscribers.=--The number of the magazine with which the
subscription _expires_ is indicated by the number annexed to the address
on the printed label. When no such number appears, the subscription ends
wih [Transcriber's note: Misspelled in original] the current year. No
notice of discontinuance need be given. The sending of "The Nursery"
will be regarded as a sufficient receipt. In changing the direction, the
OLD as well as NEW address should be given. Any one not receiving it
will notify us at once, giving date of remittance.

       *     *     *     *     *

_IN CLUB WITH OTHER PERIODICALS_.

                         Price  With Nursery
Harper's Monthly........$4.00  $4.50
Harpers Weekly...........4.00   4.50
Harper's Bazar...........4.00   4.50
Harper's Young People....1.50   2.50
Atlantic Monthly.........4.00   4.50
Scribner's Monthly.......4.00   4.50
Youth's Companion........1.75   3.00
Appleton's Journal.......3.00   3.75
Demorest's Monthly.......3.00   3.75
The Living Age...........8.00   8.50
Arthur's Home Magazine...2.50   3.00
St. Nicholas.............3.00   3.75
Wide-Awake...............2.00   3.00
Godey's Lady's Book......2.00   3.00
Domestic Monthly.........1.50   2.50
Journal of Chemistry.....1.00   2.25
American Agriculturist...1.50   2.50
Ladies' Floral Cabinet...1.30   2.50
The Household............1.00   2.25
Boston Weekly Transcript 2.00   3.00

N.B.--To obtain the benefit of the above rates, it must be distinctly
understood that a copy of "The Nursery" should be ordered with _each_
magazine clubbed with it. Both magazines must be subscribed for at the
_same time_; but they need not be to the same address. We furnish our
own magazine, and agree to pay the subscription of the other. Beyond
this we take no responsibility. _The publisher of each magazine is
responsible for its prompt delivery; and complaints must be addressed
accordingly_. Address

THE NURSERY PUBLISHING CO., 36 _Bromfield Street, Boston, Mass_.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Nursery, No. 169, January, 1881,
Vol. XXIX, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NURSERY, NO. 169 ***

***** This file should be named 17536.txt or 17536.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/7/5/3/17536/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Paul Ereaut and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

