The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is Going On
In It, Vol. 1, No. 39, August 5, 1897, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Great Round World and What Is Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 39, August 5, 1897
       A Weekly Magazine for Boys and Girls

Author: Various

Editor: Julia Truitt Bishop

Release Date: May 27, 2005 [EBook #15916]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD AND ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.(www.pgdp.net)






_FIVE CENTS._

THE GREAT ROUND WORLD
AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT

  Vol. 1                AUGUST 5, 1897                No. 39.
[Entered at Post Office, New York City, as second class matter]

[Illustration: A
WEEKLY
NEWSPAPER
FOR
BOYS AND
GIRLS]

Subscription
$2.50 per year
$1.25 6 months


    WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON. PUBLISHER
    NO. 3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST. NEW YORK CITY

=Copyright, 1897, by WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON.=


       *       *       *       *       *

...PREMIUMS...

       *       *       *       *       *

TO ANY ONE SENDING US 4 NEW SUBSCRIBERS

[Illustration: A Pocket Kodak

     Measures 2-1/4 x 2-7/8 x 3-7/8 inches, makes a picture 1-1/2 x 2
     inches, and weighs only 5 ounces. Delivered ready for 12 exposures
     without reloading.]

The Lens is of the fixed focus type, and of sufficient length of focus
(2-1/2 inches) to avoid distortion.

Has improved rotary shutter and set of three stops for lens. The slides
for changing stops and for time exposures are alongside of the exposure
lever and always show by their position what stop is before the lens and
whether the shutter is set for time or instantaneous exposures, thus
acting as a warning.

In the _quality_ of the work they will do, Pocket Kodaks equal the best
cameras on the market. They make negatives of such perfect quality that
enlargements of any size can be made from them.

The Pocket Kodaks are covered with fine leather, and the trimmings are
handsomely finished and lacquered. They are elegant, artistic, and
durable.

=For one more subscription we will send with this camera a bicycle
carrying-case=

       *       *       *       *       *

TO ANY ONE SENDING US 9 NEW SUBSCRIBERS

[Illustration: An Improved
    =No. 4=
   Bulls-Eye

     For pictures 4x5 inches; delivered ready for 12 exposures without
     reloading. Size of camera, 4-7/8 x 5-7/8 x 9-1/4 inches; weight 2
     pounds 2 ounces; length of focus of lens, 6-1/4 inches.]

Fitted with an achromatic lens of superior quality, having a set of
three stops; has two finders, one for vertical and one for horizontal
exposures; and is also provided with two sockets for tripod screws, one
for vertical and one for horizontal exposures. Fitted with improved
rotary shutter, for snap-shots or time exposures. Can be loaded in
daylight. Handsomely finished and covered with leather.

=Both of the above cameras are manufactured by the Eastman Kodak Co.,
Rochester, N.Y., and this is a guarantee of their worth=

                 =THE GREAT ROUND WORLD=
     =3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST.         NEW YORK CITY=

       *       *       *       *       *

Remember that text-books will
be taken in exchange for subscriptions
to

                 =THE= .. ..
              =GREAT ROUND WORLD=

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Second Bound Volume=

OF

=THE GREAT ROUND WORLD=

(Containing Nos. 16 to 30)

=IS NOW READY=

     Handsomely bound in strong cloth, with title on side and back.
     Price, postage paid, $1.25. Subscribers may exchange their numbers
     by sending them to us (express paid) with 35 cents to cover cost of
     binding, and 10 cents for return carriage.

  Address
=_3 and 5 West 18th Street, . . . . . . New York City_=

       *       *       *       *       *

     =TO ANY SUBSCRIBER SECURING
      ... FOR US 1 SUBSCRIPTION=


[Illustration: On Honour's Roll
Tales of Heroes in the
Nineteenth Century]

    =WE WILL SEND POST-PAID ANY ONE OF THE FOLLOWING BOOKS=

THE STORY OF THE INDIAN MUTINY.= By Ascott R. Hope. 4 illustrations.
12mo.

=THE ORCHID SEEKERS.= A Story of Adventure in Borneo. By Ashmore Russan
and Frederick Boyle. Illustrated. 8vo.

=UNDER MANY FLAGS.= Stories of Scottish Adventurers. By Davenport Adams.
Illustrated. 12 mo.

=THE FUR TRADERS OF THE WEST= or, =The Doones of Fowey=. By E.R.
Suppling. 21 full-page illustrations. 8vo.

=LOST IN AFRICA.= A Book of Adventure. By Frederick Whishaw. With
full-page illustrations. 8vo.

=THE DAYS OF BRUCE.= A Story from Scottish History. By Grace Aguilar.
Illustrated. 8vo.

=THE DESERT SHIP.= A Story of Adventure by Sea and Land. By John
Bloundelle-Burton. Illustrated. 8vo.

=NUTTALL'S STANDARD DICTIONARY.= Compiled by the Rev. James Wood.
Illustrated. 8vo. 832 pages.

[Illustration:  The Orchid
Seekers]

=GIRL'S HOME COMPANION.= Edited by Mrs. L. Valentine. Illustrated. 8vo.
Contains full description of indoor and outdoor games and valuable
information concerning embroidery, sewing, and all other occupations and
accomplishments for girls.

=LEGENDS OF KING ARTHUR AND HIS KNIGHTS.= By J.T. Knowells. 8vo.

=ON HONOUR'S ROLL.= Tales of Heroism in the Nineteenth Century. By L.
Valentine. Illustrated. 8vo.

=HARRY RAYMOND.= By Commander Cameron. Illustrated. 8vo.

=WE THREE BOYS.= By L. Valentine. Illustrated. 8vo.

=SEA FIGHTS AND LAND BATTLES.= By Mrs. Valentine. Illustrated. 8vo.

=PUZZLES OLD AND NEW.= By Professor Hoffman. 8vo. With over 500 diagrams
and illustrations.

=MASTERMAN READY.= By Captain Marryatt. Illustrated. 12mo.

=SETTLERS IN CANADA.= By Captain Marryatt. Illustrated. 12mo.

=POOR JACK.= By Captain Marryatt. Illustrated. 12mo.

       *       *       *       *       *

     The above are all cloth-bound, well-made books, and are carefully
     selected for their interest and character....

       *       *       *       *       *

              =The Great Round World=
     =3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST.           NEW YORK CITY=

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE GREAT ROUND
WORLD
AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT.]

    VOL. 1   AUGUST 5, 1897.   NO. 39

It seemed, at the early part of last week, as though the Sultan of
Turkey might be brought to terms, but matters have again become
threatening, and the outcome is as doubtful as ever.

The Sultan is a very wily person, and, finding that delays and triflings
would no longer serve him, he changed his tactics and said that he had
been misrepresented by the reports, and was as anxious for peace as the
rest of the Powers.

He issued a proclamation of the most friendly character, declaring it to
be the plain duty of Turkey to put an end to the uncertainty, and
commanded his ministers to find some means of coming to an agreement.

The following day the Ambassadors sent to Tewfik Pasha, and asked him
whether Turkey was willing to resume the peace councils in accordance
with the wishes of the Powers. They stated very clearly that if matters
were not to be discussed on those lines, they would be obliged to break
off the conference, and tell their various governments that Turkey could
only be made to obey by force of arms.

After consulting with his Government, Tewfik Pasha replied that the
Porte was willing to accept the frontier suggested--with some slight
alterations.

This did not seem unreasonable to the Ambassadors, and they telegraphed
hopefully to their governments that the peace was as good as concluded.

As to the slight changes asked for, the Powers had informed Turkey early
in the conference that they would be willing to meet her wishes in
regard to the frontier line if it was possible to do so.

Everything seemed in train for a speedy peace. In addition to being
willing to give up Thessaly, the Sultan had also intimated that he would
reduce the sum of money asked for as war indemnity. When first the
negotiations were commenced, Turkey demanded $50,000,000. It was said
that she would now accept $20,000,000.

The Ambassadors were prepared to have the Porte (the Turkish Government)
ask that all the mountain passes between Greece and Turkey should be
given to Turkey, and that the army should continue to occupy Thessaly
until the war indemnity was paid. They thought that the final
understanding would be reached at the very next meeting.

They were doomed to disappointment. The following day, when the
conference assembled, Tewfik Pasha kept the Ambassadors waiting a long
time for him, and, when he at last appeared, laid a new frontier plan
before the diplomats.

To their surprise, they found that the frontier demanded was mapped out
in direct opposition to their wishes.

They one and all declined to discuss it, and informed Tewfik that they
would adjourn until he brought a written acceptance of the frontier as
they had designated it, and the meeting broke up with unpleasant feeling
on both sides.

The military experts who had arranged the frontier line had appointed
the day after this stormy interview to meet the Turkish frontier
commission.

They waited and waited, but the Turks did not put in an appearance.

They then went over and reported the fact to the Ambassadors, who had
met together in the council room--in the hope that Tewfik would come
with the written acceptance.

The hours went by and brought no Tewfik.

The Ambassadors went to the Austrian embassy to talk the matter over and
decide what course they should pursue. They had hardly reached the place
before the Pasha appeared. He said that the Sultan, his master, had
detained him and the military commission, discussing the situation, and
added that the Sultan had decided to appoint two of the military
delegates to discuss the peace negotiations in his (Tewfik's) place.

Believing this to be but an excuse for further delay, the Ambassadors
one and all refused to have any dealings with any one but Tewfik Pasha.

The Turkish Minister then withdrew, to acquaint His Majesty with the
decision of the Ambassadors--and so the matter stands for the present.

No one knows what the Sultan's next move will be.

England does not believe that he really intends to give up Thessaly, but
the other Powers think that he will do so as soon as he is absolutely
sure that a refusal will mean war.

       *       *       *       *       *

The most interesting news in regard to Cuba this week is the renewal of
the report that Spain and Japan have entered into an alliance against
the United States.

A correspondent at Paris, France, telegraphs that the understanding
between the two countries is to the effect that should the United States
take any active measures to secure the freedom of Cuba, or persist in
the annexation of the Hawaiian Islands, Spain and Japan shall declare
war on her at the same moment. The plan is that Spain shall send vessels
to attack our Atlantic seaboard, and Japan shall simultaneously make war
on the Pacific coast.

Inquiries at the Japanese embassy only elicited a denial of the report.
The Japanese insist that it is absurd to think of an alliance between
Japan and Spain, because there is an unfriendly feeling between the two
countries on account of the war in the Philippine Islands. Spain, as you
may remember, accused Japan of assisting the rebels in Manila with the
hope of securing the Philippines for herself.

Inquiries were also made of the Secretary of State, but the department
denied the truth of the rumors as firmly as the Japanese had done.

We should not be too sure that these rumors are false on this account,
for Ambassadors and diplomatists are frequently obliged, for state
reasons, to deny facts which they know to be perfectly true.

There has been considerable excitement in Havana on account of the
arrest of some fifty of the most prominent merchants in the city.

The charge made against them was that they had been shipping goods into
the interior of the island without a license, as required by a recent
rule of Weyler's.

The true cause of their arrest was that a number of packages containing
medicine and ammunition were found on board one of the trains leaving
Havana. Weyler declared that these packages were intended for the Cuban
rebels, and had the merchants arrested.

There is intense indignation in Havana over this outrage. All the men
arrested were wealthy and prominent, some having held important official
positions in the city--one in particular having been Mayor.

It is openly said that the whole affair was planned by the Spaniards to
give them an opportunity of plundering these men of their wealth. It is
reported that the Chief of Police has informed the prisoners that they
will be released, and no further proceedings taken against them, if they
will pay him the sum of one million dollars.

When the news of these arrests became known, crowds gathered around the
jail, protesting against the Government and calling loudly for the
recall of Weyler.

The Government in Madrid has been cabled to upon the subject, but so far
no reply has been received.

A dispatch from Madrid tells us that the people are indignant over Senor
Canovas' promise to send another twenty thousand soldiers to Cuba.

They say that Spain has already suffered enough, and that the
Government ought not to ask for any more money or soldiers.

They complain that they were told that Cuba was pacified a month ago,
and that nothing remained to be done but to subdue some bands of
insurgents that were scattered throughout the island. This was only a
month ago, and now they are asked to prepare a fresh army to go to Cuba,
and are told that the Spanish cause has met with disaster.

The Spanish papers are openly declaring that the time has come to put a
stop to the sacrifice of men and money, and that the mother country must
end her wars and give her people peace.

The latest news of the insurgents is that Gomez is advancing on Havana,
and promises that at the gates of the city he will show General Weyler
whether the island is really pacified or not.

He has issued a proclamation, saying that Spain might as well stop any
attempt to grant reforms to Cuba. He says: "We will accept neither
reforms nor home rule. Spain must know that this war is one for
independence, and that the Cubans would rather die than yield. The day
we lifted our flag of liberty, we wrote on it: 'Independence or death.'"

       *       *       *       *       *

The committee appointed to inquire into the Transvaal raid has sent in
its report to Parliament--or, to speak correctly, it has sent in two
reports, for the members could not agree.

One report says that, whatever justification there may have been for the
people of Johannesberg to rebel against the rule of the Boers, there was
none whatever for Mr. Cecil Rhodes to organize and dispatch an invading
army into the Transvaal.

This portion of the committee declares that the blame rests entirely on
Cecil Rhodes, notwithstanding the fact that Dr. Jameson did finally
invade the territory without direct orders.

They find that Cecil Rhodes seriously embarrassed the home and colonial
governments, by thus breaking the peaceful understanding between the
nations; and further, that he used his high position to provoke a
rebellion, and deliberately deceived the home Government that he might
be able to carry out his own personal plans. The Government in England
is declared to be entirely innocent of any knowledge of the affair, but
two officers of the colonial Government are found guilty.

To the surprise of everybody, the report contains no suggestion for the
punishment of any of the offenders.

In regard to Cecil Rhodes' refusal to produce the telegrams which they
asked for, the committee says that he ought undoubtedly to be
disciplined for his conduct, but that it would take so much time to do
so that it would perhaps be as well to let the matter alone.

This is one report.

The other is much stronger in its tone. It blames everybody concerned,
and says that there is little doubt that the raid was simply a plot
arranged to make wealthy men wealthier.

This report does not agree that the home Government is entirely
blameless. It says that it is a pity that the matter was not more fully
investigated, so that it could be thoroughly ascertained whether the
Government, and especially Mr. Joseph Chamberlain, was in truth ignorant
of the plot.

Both reports agree that the officers who led the raiders imagined that
they were acting under orders from the British Government, and that they
have been punished more heavily than they deserved. The second report
suggests that their commissions should be restored to them.

After the raid was over these soldiers were arrested and sent to
England, where they were tried for invading a friendly country without
proper authority. They were found guilty and sent to Holloway Jail in
London.

When they were convicted they were one and all deprived of their
commissions in the British army. While they were only imprisoned for a
short time, and were not harshly treated in any sense, the fact of being
dismissed from the army was a very serious thing for them.

A commission in the army means the authority by which the officer holds
his rank of Captain or Colonel--or whatever it may be--and is naturally
valued very highly by the holder.

In England, especially, the highest class of young men go into the army
as officers, and to leave the army without wishing to, to have one's
commission taken away from one, is a great disgrace. An officer who
leaves the army at his own wish has all other careers open to him, but
one who is dismissed from the service is disgraced and cannot easily
find fresh employment, and moreover loses all the income and standing
that being an officer in the army had given him.

This is the position of the officers who led the Transvaal raid; they
have been disgraced and deprived of their profession.

If, indeed, they are innocent, it is only right that their commissions
should be restored to them.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Tariff Conference has done its work very rapidly.

After less than two weeks of discussion, this committee has prepared its
report and given it to Congress.

It was presented to the House on the 20th of July, and after a debate of
two hours it was adopted by a vote of 185 to 115.

The Conference had done its work so well, and had arranged the changes
in the bill in such a manner, that the House made little objection to
them.

The measure now goes to the Senate, where it has to be readopted; but,
as the changes made by the Conference were so very slight, no doubt is
felt that it will be passed without delay.

Unless something very unforeseen occurs, it will be in the hands of the
President before the week is out, and the Dingley Bill will then become
a law.

There is general rejoicing that the long and tedious discussion is over,
and that Congress will be able to adjourn before many days have passed.

       *       *       *       *       *

An interesting story comes from Paris about the new X-rays.

According to the account which reaches us, an apparatus has been
prepared by which the Custom House officers can examine the baggage and
ascertain whether there are any dutiable articles concealed in it,
without going through all the trouble of unpacking and searching.

It is said that cigars can be easily counted by this new process, which
promises to be a great success.

The method of using it is very simple.

The instrument is mounted on a large table; one of the Custom House
officers takes the fluoroscope and stands at the end of the table. Two
others seize the baggage, and piece by piece hold it in front of the
rays for examination.

If this method is really as useful as it is declared to be, it will save
an infinite amount of trouble in our Custom House. Unfortunately there
are so many more dutiable articles in this country than in France that
it is possible even the X-rays might not be sharp enough to discover
them all.

       *       *       *       *       *

The treaty for the annexation of Hawaii has been approved by the Senate
Committee on Foreign Relations, and returned to the Senate for
ratification.

The committee thoroughly approved of the treaty, and sent it to the
Senate without any alteration or criticism. It therefore stands as we
explained it to you in No. 34.

The chairman of the committee, Senator Davis, would be glad to have the
treaty ratified at once, as he thinks that speedy action would be the
best way to avoid any trouble with Japan. He has, however, been warned
that if he tries to press the treaty this session, the Senate will block
it with the lengthy discussions about which we told you. Senator Davis
therefore thinks that it will be best to let the matter rest for the
present.

The President called a cabinet council to discuss the affairs of Hawaii,
and at the council a policy was laid down to protect our interests in
the Sandwich Islands until the treaty can be ratified.

In accordance with this policy full instructions have been sent to
Rear-Admiral Beardslee, who is in command of the cruiser _Philadelphia_,
which is now in Hawaiian waters.

The Admiral has been commanded to land a force of sailors and marines
and hoist the American flag over the Hawaiian Islands at the first sign
of hostility from Japan.

As we stated before, the American fleet in Hawaiian waters is to be
reinforced by the battle-ship _Oregon_, one of our first-class cruisers.
This will give the Admiral three vessels under his command--the
_Philadelphia_, the _Oregon_, and the _Marion_. There have been several
rumors that the _Marion_ was to be recalled, because she was an
old-fashioned wooden ship, and was badly in need of repairs. She will,
however, remain where she is for the present.

       *       *       *       *       *

Reliable information has been brought to us of an enormous find of gold
on the borders of British Columbia and Alaska.

The accounts of the find read like a fairy-story.

Those familiar with placer mining declare that the new gold-fields are
the richest and finest ever discovered; they say that the California
find of 1849 cannot be compared with this present one.

The place where this great discovery has been made is on the borders of
Alaska, not many miles east of the British Columbia boundary, and
therefore on English territory. It is called the Klondike district.

The Klondike is a river, a tributary of the Yukon River, into which it
flows above Forty Mile Creek.

The story of the find is interesting.

It was discovered by an old hunter named McCormick.

McCormick had married an Indian squaw, and was therefore, according to
the custom, known by the uncomplimentary name of squaw man, and was not
much liked by other white men.

He lived a very lonely life in his cabin, with his squaw wife and his
half-Indian children, and made his living by hunting and fishing.

In the spring of 1896 he went up the Klondike River to fish. At the
point where this stream meets the Yukon, very large salmon are often
caught. It was for this profitable spot that McCormick set out.

He had poor luck, however. The salmon didn't run as usual, and his
fishing expedition was a failure.

He didn't want to go home empty-handed, and cast about for some fresh
game. In his uncertainty he bethought him that the Indians had often
told him that gold was very abundant in this region, and could be washed
out of the sand in any little pan or vessel that hunters happened to
carry.

Failing to catch salmon, he determined to seek for gold, and, starting
off in the direction the Indians had pointed out, he soon found that
their stories were absolutely true.

Filling his pockets with all the nuggets he could carry, he started back
with the news.

As soon as word was spread abroad, the miners began to rush into the new
district.

After McCormick's fishing-trip several men went prospecting, and,
finding that he had not exaggerated the greatness of his discovery, men
began to hurry to the Klondike region to take up their claims and secure
their share of the great prize.

The work of mining this gold is very lengthy and somewhat curious.

The Yukon region, in which the Klondike lies, is very cold. Alaska is
bounded on the north by the Arctic Ocean, and the Arctic circle runs
right through the Yukon country. You can imagine therefore that it is
terribly cold, and that the ground is frozen nearly all the year round.

The rich pay-dirt in which the gold is found lies from eighteen to
twenty-five feet below the surface. It would not pay the miners to wait
for the short warm season when the frost is out of the ground to make
their harvest; so they have found a plan to get at the gold all the year
round, no matter how hard or frozen the earth may be.

They build great fires on the top of the gravel, and fix them so that
they shall burn all night. When morning comes about eighteen inches of
the ground beneath the fire is found to be thawed out. This surface is
shovelled away, and another fire built on the gravel where it is frozen
again.

They keep right on in this slow and tedious way, until finally the
pay-dirt is reached.

The yield from these new gold-fields is something wonderful. It is
greater than anything ever recorded in the history of gold mining.

[Illustration: ALASKA: YUKON VALLEY AND GOLD FIELDS.

(The State of Pennsylvania is inserted to show comparative size.)]

One miner, who is a thoroughly experienced man, declares that he is
absolutely amazed at the amount of gold that has already been produced.
He says that the work has only been commenced, and that this present
find which is setting people crazy is nothing to the gold that will be
discovered as soon as the miners really get to work.

He stated that, in addition to the rich pay-dirt we have already spoken
of, there were veins of gold in the rocks underneath, which veins
appeared to grow richer the farther they were probed. In his opinion the
gold deposits of the Yukon region form the mother vein of all the gold
in North America.

Many people are hurrying to the Klondike district from all parts, and
the excitement is intense.

San Francisco has caught the gold fever. It reached the city through
some miners from Klondike, who arrived by steamer, bringing with them
piles of shining gold to prove the truth of their stories.

Not one member of this party went up to Alaska with anything more than
his outfit and a few hundred dollars. All have brought back stores of
riches.

The smallest amount of gold owned by any of these men was valued at five
thousand dollars, while several had as much as fifty thousand dollars'
worth.

The luckiest people in this little band were a Mr. and Mrs. Lippey, who
left New York in April, 1896.

Mrs. Lippey was the first woman to go over the trail to Klondike. She
went because she did not wish her husband to undertake the journey
alone, preferring to share his hardships with him.

They brought back sixty thousand dollars' worth of gold.

Another party has just reached Seattle, Wash., having come direct by
steamer from St. Michaels, Alaska.

In this party there were sixty-eight people, who brought back with them
one and one-half tons of gold. This is worth nearly a million dollars.

[Illustration: Alaskan Child and Dogsled]

The gold is found in dust and nuggets ranging in size from a hazelnut to
fine bird-shot.

It must not be supposed that this gold is lightly earned. Those who have
returned say that the hardships of the life are beyond description. Many
declare that no amount of gold could tempt them back, as beyond the
hard, rough life, the severe cold, and the constant labor, there is an
ever-present dread of starvation. It is difficult for any man to take in
sufficient food to last him through the long winter, and there is
hardly any possibility of obtaining more when the supplies run out.

A company has been formed to send provisions up into the district, and
if this is done the work will be rendered much easier.

The treasury of the United States has already begun to feel the benefit
of the Klondike gold discovery.

The San Francisco mint has received half a million dollars' worth of the
gold, and expects another half-million by the next steamer.

The Mint Bureau has been informed that Alaskan gold has been received at
several of the Pacific ports for shipment to the East, and the ton and a
half from Seattle is also on its way.

       *       *       *       *       *

There has long been a movement on foot to limit the wearing of feathers
on hats.

So many charming birds are slaughtered to adorn the headgear of our
women folks, that it has been feared some of the songsters might become
extinct.

A law has, however, just been passed for their protection in
Massachusetts, which forbids the use of certain birds for millinery
purposes.

The petition begging that a bill of this character might be framed by
the State Senators was drawn up by United States Senator George F. Hoar.

The petition was supposed to come from the birds themselves, and to be
signed by thirty-five song-birds. It was written in such a delightful
manner that it roused the interest of the Massachusetts Legislature, and
the desired bill was prepared and passed in an astonishingly short space
of time.

The document is so pretty and graceful in its tone and language that
you would certainly like to read it for yourselves.

Here it is:


"_To the Great and General Court of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts:_

"We, the song-birds of Massachusetts and their playfellows, make this
our humble petition. We know more about you than you think we do. We
know how good you are. We have hopped about the roofs and looked in at
your windows of the houses you have built for poor and sick and hungry
people and little lame and deaf and blind children. We have built our
nests in the trees and sung many a song as we flew about the gardens and
parks you have made so beautiful for your children, especially your poor
children, to play in. Every year we fly a great way over the country,
keeping all the time where the sun is bright and warm. And we know that
whenever you do anything the people all over this great land between the
seas and the great lakes find it out, and pretty soon will try to do the
same. We know. We know.

"We are Americans just the same as you are. Some of us, like some of
you, came across the great sea. But most of the birds like us have lived
here a long while; and the birds like us welcomed your fathers when they
came here many, many years ago. Our fathers and mothers have always done
their best to please your fathers and mothers.

"Now, we have a sad story to tell you. Thoughtless or bad people are
trying to destroy us. They kill us because our feathers are beautiful.
Even pretty and sweet girls, who, we should think, would be our best
friends, kill our brothers and children so that they may wear our
plumage on their hats. Sometimes people kill us for mere wantonness.
Cruel boys destroy our nests and steal our eggs and our young ones.
People with guns and snares lie in wait to kill us; as if the place for
a bird were not in the sky, alive, but in a shop window or in a glass
case. If this goes on much longer all our song-birds will be gone.
Already we are told in some other countries that used to be full of
birds they are now almost gone. Even the nightingales are being killed
in Italy.

"Now we humbly pray that you will stop all this and will save us from
this sad fate. You have always made a law that no one shall kill a
harmless song-bird or destroy our nests or our eggs. Will you please
make another one that no one shall wear our feathers, so that no one
will kill us to get them? We want them all ourselves. Your pretty girls
are pretty enough without them. We are told that it is as easy for you
to do it as for a blackbird to whistle.

[Illustration:

No. 1. Hummingbird.
    2. Whippoorwill.
    3. Bobolink.
    4. Scarlet Tanager.
    5. Baltimore Oriole.
    6. Song-Sparrow.]

"If you will, we know how to pay you a hundred times over. We will teach
your children to keep themselves clean and neat. We will show them how
to live together in peace and love and to agree as we do in our nests.
We will build pretty houses which you will like to see. We will play
about your garden and flower-beds--ourselves like flowers on
wings--without any cost to you. We will destroy the wicked insects and
worms that spoil your cherries and currants and plums and apples and
roses. We will give you our best songs, and make the spring more
beautiful and the summer sweeter to you. Every June morning when you
go out into the field, oriole and bluebird and blackbird and bobolink
will fly after you and make the day more delightful to you. And when you
go home tired after sundown, vesper-sparrow will tell you how grateful
we are. When you sit down on your porch after dark, fifebird and
hermit-thrush and wood-thrush will sing to you, and even whippoorwill
will cheer you up a little. We know where we are safe. In a little while
all the birds will come to live in Massachusetts again, and everybody
who loves music will like to make a summer home with you."

The signers are:

     Brown thrasher,              Kingbird,
     Robert o' Lincoln,           Swallow,
     Hermit-thrush,               Cedarbird,
     Vesper-sparrow,              Cowbird,
     Robin redbreast,             Martin,
     Song-sparrow,                Veery,
     Scarlet tanager,             Vireo,
     Summer redbird,              Oriole,
     Blue heron,                  Blackbird,
     Hummingbird,                 Fifebird,
     Yellowbird,                  Wren,
     Whippoorwill,                Linnet,
     Water-wagtail,               Peewee,
     Woodpecker,                  Phoebe,
     Pigeon-woodpecker,           Yokebird,
     Indigo-bird,                 Lark,
     Yellowthroat,                Sandpiper,
     Wilson's thrush,             Chewink.
     Chickadee,

The bill which was drawn up in response to this petition provides that
any one who shall wear birds or feathers for the purpose of dress or
ornament shall be fined $10, and that the same fine shall be exacted
from all persons who take or kill certain specially mentioned
song-birds.

The police are rather worried over the new law, because they are not
sure whether they have the right to arrest ladies who are wearing
feathers in their hats.

The Chief of Police has sent out a circular (containing a copy of the
act that has just been passed) to all milliners and dealers in birds'
feathers.

He intends to punish these merchants if they infringe the law, and then,
when the law has had time to be generally known and understood, he
intends to arrest all women who still persist in wearing feathers in
their hats.

New York passed a similar law last year, but the Governor refused to
sign it, because the Forest Commissioners did not approve of it.

       *       *       *       *       *

We told you last week that President McKinley was anxious to withhold
the letters that had passed between this country and England in
reference to the seal question.

Unfortunately his wishes have been thwarted by the publication of Mr.
Sherman's letter to Ambassador Hay.

It is a great pity that this letter found its way into print, for it is
most unfriendly in its tone.

It accuses Great Britain of bad faith in her method of carrying out the
terms of the Paris treaty. It declares that at the end of the first year
the United States discovered that the provisions of the Paris treaty
were not sufficient for the protection of the seals, and that this
Government immediately asked England to call a conference and reconsider
the matter.

Great Britain put off replying to this request for three years, and now,
after all this delay, says that there is nothing to show that seal life
is in danger.

Mr. Sherman, in his letter, complains that the English Prime Minister
bases his refusal on the report of an English scientist named Prof.
D'Arcy Thompson. This report Secretary Sherman declares to be so greatly
at variance with the reports of Dr. David Starr Jordan and the many
observations made by other distinguished naturalists, that he insists
that it is not a reliable document, but merely written to suit the
political situation.

The publication of this correspondence has called forth much angry
comment from England.

The result of the affair has been exactly what the President
predicted--the rousing of unnecessary bad feeling between the two
countries.

       *       *       *       *       *

We have had a slight disagreement with the Moorish Government.

The country of Morocco is situated on the northwest of Africa, and is
bounded on the north by the Mediterranean Sea, and on the west by the
Atlantic Ocean.

The Straits of Gibraltar lie between Morocco and Spain, and the Pillars
of Hercules, about which you have probably heard, are the promontories
of Europe and Africa which jut out into the Mediterranean Sea at the
Straits, and are but eight miles apart.

The European point is called the Rock of Gibraltar; the African, Abyla,
or Apes' Hill, from the number of apes that have made their home on it.

Morocco is ruled by a Sultan, whose authority is supreme.

The Moors, as the inhabitants of this country are called, are a very
ancient and warlike people, who were at one time a very powerful race.

In the twelfth century they conquered Andalusia, Valencia, and a part of
Aragon in Spain, together with a portion of Portugal. In Spain they
established the Kingdom of Granada, about which so many enchanting poems
and romances have been written.

In the city of Granada they built the famous Alhambra. This magnificent
palace and citadel was built by the Moorish kings of Granada in the
thirteenth century. The Royal Villa, the Generaliffe, which is also in
the city of Granada, was built about the same time.

The Alhambra and the Generaliffe are considered two of the most
beautiful buildings in the world. The architecture and the decorations
are perfect in detail and execution. You must read some time Washington
Irving's "Alhambra." It is filled with interesting legends of these
Moorish palaces.

The Moors were driven out of Spain in the fifteenth century.

They are still a very warlike people, and have had frequent campaigns
against France and Spain.

Their country is supposed to be very rich in minerals, but as yet it has
not been developed.

A great part of the trade of Morocco is controlled by foreigners, and in
consequence special laws have had to be made to protect the traders.

According to the treaty between the United States and the Sultan of
Morocco, American traders are allowed to employ two natives as agents
for the sale of their goods. These natives are given the same protection
as Americans.

The trouble with Morocco arose from the fact that one of the native
agents, while returning from his rounds, was assaulted and robbed of
$1,200, the outrage occurring in broad daylight in front of the
consulate.

The merchant for whom the agent was working reported the matter to the
Moorish Government, and demanded that the thieves should be arrested and
punished.

Notwithstanding that these robbers were well-known characters, the
Moorish authorities made no attempt to bring them to justice, and paid
no attention to the protests of the Consul.

The agent and the merchant immediately filed a claim for damages against
the Moorish Government, and the Consul cabled to this country, asking
that an American gunboat be sent to Tangier, to show the Moors that the
United States proposes to protect her citizens.

The flag-ship _San Francisco_ and the cruiser _Raleigh_ immediately set
out for Tangier, one of the principal seaports of Morocco.

The appearance of these vessels had a very healthy effect on the
authorities. One of the robbers was immediately arrested, and the Moors
agreed to search for the other and bring him to justice.

       *       *       *       *       *

A story comes from Oklahoma that gophers have completely destroyed a
canal which has recently been built at an expense of $40,000.

These gophers are little animals, striped and spotted, and about the
size of a large rat.

The Oklahoma Canal was built to bring the waters of the river through
the town, with the idea of erecting mills all along the banks and making
Oklahoma a more prosperous city.

It was laid out by expert engineers, and took a large amount of time and
money to build; it was five miles long.

When the canal was completed and opened, it proved a great success;
there was sufficient force of water to turn any number of mills, and a
great era of money-making appeared to be ahead of Oklahoma.

Unfortunately the soil through which the canal had been dug was porous
and sandy.

Before the work had been long completed, gophers appeared on the banks
and began to burrow their holes.

The water washed into the burrows, and soon a crevasse appeared, and the
canal swept through the sandy banks.

Repairs were attempted, and for a long time the people were so anxious
to preserve their canal that they continued these repairs at great
expense. Finally the Canal Company became discouraged; they could no
longer afford to fight the gophers, and so they abandoned the waterway
and left the little pests the victors.

In a very short time the canal was gone.

The banks, riddled by the gophers, gave way, and the waters soon flowed
back into their original course. Where the canal once ran, farmers are
now ploughing and planting their crops, and Oklahoma has lost its fine
canal.

                                     G.H. ROSENFELD.

       *       *       *       *       *

          WE ARE PREPARING

                ==A==

           =MAP OF ALASKA=

       *       *       *       *       *

      Corrected to Date, after the Latest
      Russian and Government Surveys ...

       *       *       *       *       *

             _PRICE, 10 CENTS_

       *       *       *       *       *

    *        *        *        *        *

    EXAMINATIONS

    Have you thought of the Relief Maps for examination work?
    Are you following from day to day the war in the East?

    Klemm's Relief Practice Maps

    especially adapted to examination work, as they are perfectly free
    from all political details. Any examination work may be done on them.

     For following the Eastern Question use Klemm's Roman Empire,
     and record each day's events. Small flags attached to pins,
     and moved on a map as the armies move, keep the details
     before you in a most helpful way, especially when you use
     the Relief Maps.

    SAMPLE SET, RELIEF MAPS (15), $1.00
    SAMPLE ROMAN EMPIRE, - 10 CENTS

    WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON, - - 5 West 18th Street, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

Do you Cover your Books?

    THE "ONE PIECE"
    ADJUSTABLE BOOK COVERS

are made of the strongest and best book-cover paper obtainable. This paper
is made in large quantities especially for these book covers and will
protect books perfectly. The book covers themselves are a marvel of
ingenuity, and, although they are in one piece and can be adjusted to fit
perfectly any sized book without cutting the paper, they are also so
simple that any boy or girl can use them; as they are already gummed they
are always ready for use.

A sample dozen will be mailed to any address for 20 cents (or ten two-cent
stamps) if you write

    WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON

    3 and 5 West 18th Street, New York City

       *       *       *       *       *

       *       *       *       *       *

TO ANY ONE SENDING US


   =8= _NEW...._
       _SUBSCRIBERS_

     WE WILL SEND A

                               =JUNIOR RIFLE=

     22 calibre, highly finished, with rebounding lock, case-hardened
     frame, detachable barrel, automatic shell ejector. Weight 4-1/2
     pounds.

[Illustration: Rifle]

                                      OR


                               =A "Shattuck New=
                               =Model" Shot=Gun=


     Side-snap action, rebounding lock, walnut pistol-grip stock, patent
     fore end, rubber butt, and pistol-grip cap, nickel frame,
     choke-bored, twist-steel barrel. 12 or 16 gauge.

               =THE GREAT ROUND WORLD=
     3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST.          NEW YORK CITY

       *       *       *       *       *

="The Great Round World" PRIZE CONTEST=

THE GREAT ROUND WORLD is now over six months old, and it feels some
anxiety to know just how much interest its readers have taken in the
news and how much information they have gained from its pages. To
ascertain this, it has been decided to offer ten prizes for the best
answers to the following:

     =Name ten of the most important events that have been mentioned in
     "The Great Round World" in the first 30 numbers, that is, up to
     number of June 3d.=

     _In mentioning these events give briefly reasons for considering
     them important._

This competition will be open to subscribers only, and any one desiring
to enter the competition must send to this office their name and the
date of their subscription; a number will then be given them.

All new subscribers will be furnished with a card entitling them to
enter the competition.

In making the selection of important events, remember that wars and
political events are not necessarily the most important. If, for
instance, the air-ship had turned out to be a genuine and successful
thing, it would have been most important as affecting the history of the
world. Or if by chance the telephone or telegraph had been invented in
this period, these inventions would have been _important_ events.

Prizes will be awarded to those who make the best selection and who
mention the events in the best order of their importance. Answers may be
sent in any time before September 1st.

The Great Round World does not want you to hurry over this contest, but
to take plenty of time and do the work carefully. It will be a pleasant
occupation for the summer months.

We would advise you to take the magazines starting at No. 1, look them
over carefully, keep a note-book at your side, and jot down in it the
events that seem to you important; when you have finished them all, No.
1 to 30, look over your notes and select the ten events that seem to you
to be the most important, stating after each event your reason for
thinking it important.

For instance: suppose you decide that the death of Dr. Ruiz was one of
these important events, you might say, "The killing of Dr. Ruiz in the
prison of Guanabacoa--because it brought the cruelties practised on
American citizens to the attention of our Government," etc., etc.

In sending your answers put your number and the date only on them, for
the judges are not to know names and addresses of the contestants, that
there may be no favoritism shown.

It is important to put date on, for if two or more are found of similar
standing, the one first received will be given preference.

Address all letters to REVIEW PRIZE CONTEST DEPARTMENT,
GREAT ROUND WORLD, 3 and 5 West 18th Street, New York City.

          _Write answer on one side of the paper only_
     =Prizes will be selections from the premium catalogue=

         No. 1. Premiums as given for 15 Subscriptions
         No. 2.    "      "   "    "  12        "
         No. 3.    "      "   "    "  10        "
         No. 4.    "      "   "    "   9        "
         No. 5.    "      "   "    "   8        "
         No. 6.    "      "   "    "   7        "
         No. 7.    "      "   "    "   5        "
         No. 8.    "      "   "    "   5        "
         No. 9.    "      "   "    "   5        "
         No. 10.   "      "   "    "   5        "






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is
Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 39, August 5, 1897, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD AND ***

***** This file should be named 15916.txt or 15916.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/5/9/1/15916/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.(www.pgdp.net)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

