Project Gutenberg's Dew Drops Vol. 37. No. 17, April 26, 1914, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Dew Drops Vol. 37. No. 17, April 26, 1914

Author: Various

Release Date: November 27, 2004 [EBook #14180]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DEW DROPS VOL. 37. NO. 17, ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Suzanne Lybarger and the PG Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.










DEW DROPS


VOL. 37. No. 17. WEEKLY.


DAVID C. COOK PUBLISHING CO., ELGIN, ILLINOIS.

GEORGE E. COOK, EDITOR.

APRIL 26, 1914.




AMONG THE ROCKS

By Margaret E. Hays


The tide was low, and a dark line of rocks showed up clearly in the
still water.

"I wonder what those rocks are really like," said Toby rising slowly
from his seat.

"It looks almost as if we could paddle out to them," said his twin
sister Nancy, as she pushed her red curls under her sun-bonnet.

"I vote we try!" exclaimed Toby, seizing her by the arm. "We can go out
a long way at low tide--it's all so flat."

"I'm sure lots of ships must have been wrecked on the rocks," added
Nancy. "Perhaps we shall find some treasure."

The next moment they were hurrying off.

On and on they paddled, till the water was well above their knees. Then
a few minutes more, and Toby laid his hand on a rock.

"I don't see any sign of wrecks!" said Nancy, looking about.

For a few minutes they stood, then Nancy caught sight of the boat.

"Oh, there's the wreck! Why, it's only a little boat."

"Of course it is! What else did you think? It's really some life boat
that has been put off from a wreck, and it may be full of treasures!"

Cautiously they worked their way to it, panting with excitement. What
were they about to discover?

"See," said Toby breathlessly, "the anchor rope had broken and caught
among the rocks! I wonder we never saw the boat here at high tide--it
would be visible then!"

"I hope--oh!" Nancy's voice was full of disappointment.

"What?"

"Why, it's only Rowan's old Lily! It isn't a wreck at all! It was on the
beach this morning!"

The children stood looking blankly at the boat.

"There's something moving!"

There was something queer about the "wreck" after all!

Half-frightened, and hanging on to Toby's arm, Nancy peeped over into
the boat, and the next moment she shrieked in alarm, and something
sprang out of the locker and clung to her neck!

"Oh--h!" Nancy pulled at the clinging creature in terror, but Toby was
bent with laughter!

"Stop it, Nan! It's only a kitten!" he cried, as soon as he could speak.

It was true! A poor, shivering little tabby kitten was cuddling into
Nancy's neck, mewing with terror!

"Oh, the little darling!" she exclaimed. "How frightened it must have
been! I wonder whose kitten it is?"

[Illustration: "How frightened it must have been! I wonder whose kitten
it is?"]

"If we can't find out I should think we might keep it ourselves."

"Wouldn't it be lovely to have a kittie of our own?"

"I'm afraid we ought to ask a few people first," said Toby sadly.
"There's old Rowan. Shall we go and tell him about the boat?"

Old Rowan was looking gloomily out to sea, and never noticed the twins
till they stood before him.

"Please, Mr. Rowan," said Toby, "we've found your boat."

"Found my boat?" asked the old man absently.

"Yes, the Lily. She's out there among the rocks."

"Is she? Ay, she got adrift at high tide. I'd better go after her at
once." But Rowan didn't seem much interested in his boat!

"Me--ew!" A furry ball suddenly sprang onto the fishermen's shoulder,
purring delightedly!

"Hullo!" Rowan was now quite wide awake, and stared around him. "Where
did you come from, Bunch?"

"We found her in the boat--do you know whose she is?" asked Nancy, and
even Toby looked anxious.

"Ay, that I do! My little grandchild has been breaking her heart all day
over Bunch. She's a cripple, you see. Miss, and the kitten's company for
her. It must have followed me to the shore this morning and gone to
sleep on the nets. Matty will glad to find it!"

"Shall we take Bunch home to her?" asked Nancy, sighing at the thought
of parting with her treasure-trove.

"It would be real kind. Miss."

She was glad she had offered, when she saw poor Matty's face beam at the
sight of her only playmate.




A QUEER SNAKE.

BY MARY E.Q. BRUSH.


It was the Dalton children's first year in Florida. They enjoyed the
sunshine, the balmy air and fragrant flowers very much. There was only
one thing to mar their pleasure and that was their dread of snakes.

Tilly, the little colored girl who used to play with them sometimes, had
big stories to tell.

"Dar's rattlers in de pine woods, hidin' on de sunny sides of stumps:
and dar's a pow'ful sight o' moccasins down amonst de water-hyacinths
near de bayou. Youse bettah look out, honey, or dey'll cotch youalls,
shuah!"

Mabel, Tom, Hetty and Charlie talked the matter over very seriously,
almost solemnly.

"Do you s'pose they'll crawl into the house?" Hetty said, her eyes large
and round with fearful anticipations.

Tom shook his head gravely.

"No telling! I heard a missionary from India say once how those awful
cobras in that country used to drop right down from the ceiling."

Mabel drew a long breath.

"My stars! I'd hate to wake up in the morning and find a snake near my
pillow!"

"Guess we'd better keep a good lookout," was Charlie's emphatic
suggestion.

One day when papa and mamma and little Hal went in the launch across the
river to see the new orange grove, and the children were left alone
save for old Uncle Pomp who was hoeing in the truck patch, something
happened that made quite a scare. Hetty went into mamma's room for a
spool of white thread, and when she came out there was a frightened look
on her face.

"Oh, there's a snake on mamma's bed!" she exclaimed.

Tom and Charlie sprang up so suddenly from their game of parchesi that
counters and disks fell to the floor.

Then all four children hurried to the door of mamma's room and peeped
cautiously in. It was not very light in the room for the window shades
had been pulled partly down to shut out the glare of the noonday sun,
but sure enough, it could be seen very plainly that there was something
on the bed--a half-coiled, bluish-green snake with brown stripes.

Mabel uttered a scream.

"It squirms--I saw it!" she cried.

"No you didn't either," said Tom. "You just thought so, because you're
so scared. But it is a snake, sure enough and it's asleep. Guess we'd
better not arouse it."

"Somebody ought to kill it," Hetty whispered, her teeth chattering. "One
of yon boys'd better get Uncle Pomp; have him bring his hoe or
something."

"I'll go," said Charlie quickly.

"Let's all go," suggested Mabel.

Tom hesitated a little. He was the bravest of the lot, though the
youngest.

"Say, somebody ought to stay and watch that snake; if it crawls down, we
want to know where he goes to. I'll stay--only get Uncle Pomp soon's you
can."

But the children couldn't find the old darkey. So the children came
trooping back to the house. But when they peeped into mamma's room
again, there was no snake on the bed! Nor was there any Tom to be seen!

"Shucks! I knew he wasn't as brave as he pretended to be--you see he's
deserted!" growled Charlie.

[Illustration: "You see, he's deserted."]

Just then there was a chuckle from the other side of the bed and up
popped Tommy who had been crouching on the floor there. And if you'll
believe it, there was the reptile that had so scared the children around
his neck!

"It wasn't a snake at all!" Tom cried, grinning. "See, it's only little
Hal's necktie, that old blue and green, bias-cut silk thing that sort of
twists up. Weren't we silly geese though!"




RAINDROPS.


     Little Pit and Little Pat
       Come out in stormy weather;
     They chase each other down the pane
       And then run off together.




TOODLES' MISHAP.

BY ASTON MOORE.


Toodles was dreadfully meddlesome. He could not leave things alone. If
you took the slippers away from him, he tried to eat the mat. If you put
the mat outside the door, he tore the corner of the tablecloth. And when
the cloth was folded up, he sharpened his teeth on the legs of the
table.

One evening he learned a lesson which made him a better dog. He was shut
in the kitchen, to keep him out of mischief. The plates and dishes were
on the shelves out of reach. There was no carpet on the floor. And his
sharp teeth could not do much harm to the plain deal legs of the chairs
and table.

But there was a lighted candle in a tall brass candlestick upon the
table. Toodles scrambled onto a chair, jumped to the table, and tried to
bite the candlestick. He could not break or tear it, but he soon knocked
it over, and the candle rolled to the floor, where it lay burning in a
pool of grease. Toodles ran to play with the candle. Next moment, he was
racing round the room, screaming with pain and fright. He had burned his
paw.

[Illustration: Toodles.]

If he is mischievous now, you have only to show him a lighted candle. It
makes him quiet and good at once.




THE DOOR OF SPRING.

BY HELEN M. RICHARDSON.


     April unlocks the door of spring,
     And soon you'll hear a robin sing.
     A bluebird perched upon a tree
     Will woo his mate. Perchance you'll see
     An early redwing, if you go
     Down to the swamp where catkins grow.
     For April warden is, of all
     The things that went to sleep, last fall.

     Just where the field mouse and the toad
     Have burrowed; where, beside the road,
     The grasshopper and katydid
     All winter have been safely hid;
     And when the bumblebee will come
     A-booming back with pleasant hum?
     April can tell you, for 'tis she
     Opens the door that sets them free.




ADOPTING A GRANDMOTHER.

BY MARY STARR CONEY.


"Oh, Eloise! Where are you going?" Marjorie Blake rushed down the steps
as she caught sight of her friend dressed in her very best clothes and
carrying a small valise.

"Guess where! It's the best place in the whole world!"

"Away on the train?" questioned Marjorie eagerly.

"Of course. My grandma doesn't live here. Goodness! I told you!" laughed
Eloise. "Would you have guessed?"

"No, for I didn't know you had a grandma."

"Why, of course, I have! Haven't you?"

"No, Eloise."

"How awful!" Eloise dropped the valise in her dismay. "Why, Fannie Green
has two. I've only one, but she is the sweetest, beautifulest grandma
you ever saw. I'm awfully sorry you haven't got one. But here comes
mamma, so good-by."

After Eloise had gone away, Marjorie walked slowly back to the house.
She had never felt the loss of a grandmother before, but now it weighed
heavily upon her.

"If grandmas are so nice, it does seem as if I ought to have one," she
said to herself, "'specially as some little girls have two!" Marjorie
sat down on the steps and with heavy heart thought over the situation.

At last a plan suggested itself and she sprang to her feet.

"When Aunt Mary didn't have any little girl and wanted one; she went to
an orphan asylum and adopted one. Why can't I adopt a grandma?" Marjorie
asked herself excitedly. "I never heard of an asylum of grandmas, but
that doesn't matter! I want only one, and surely somewhere there must be
one for me."

The child looked across the street. The family in the third house were
strangers who had moved in a few days before. Marjorie was playing in
the yard when they came, and she remembered seeing an old lady go into
the house. There weren't any children over there, she knew, for she had
watched eagerly for some to appear, but none had. Maybe she could get
this old lady to be her grandma.

The little girl rushed across the street and rang the door bell. Then
her heart began a loud beating. S'pose the old lady shouldn't want to be
adopted and should act cross? The child had half a minute to run away
before anyone came to the door. But that would be cowardly and Marjorie
detested a coward, so she decided to stand her ground.

At last the door opened, and Marjorie looked up eagerly, into the face
of a kind grandmotherly looking old lady standing there.

"Good-morning!" The old lady smiled invitingly at the child, who stood
there with flushed cheeks and happy brown eyes. "Did you want something
of me, dear?"

"Yes'm," replied Marjorie, catching her breath, "I want to adopt you!"

"To adopt me! Why, dear child, what do you mean?"

"I want to adopt you for my grandma. You see, I haven't even one grandma
and some little girls have two. I don't think that's fair, do you?"

"No, really that doesn't seem fair," answered the old lady, her eyes
twinkling with amusement.

"I'm lonesome without a grandma, and I thought maybe you hadn't any
grand-children, or even if you had some, p'raps you wouldn't mind having
one more. So I came over to adopt you--that is--if you please!"

Quickly the twinkle left the old lady's eyes and she put her arm close
around Marjorie. "You dear child!" she exclaimed, "of course you can
adopt me. I haven't a grandchild in the whole world but even if there
were a dozen of them, I'd still have room in my heart for you!"




"We cannot be free from unkind words unless we are free from unkind
feelings."




THE FIVE CASTAWAYS.

BY COE HAYNE.


When Lena Stuart sprained her ankle the doctor told her that she could
not walk on it for at least ten days.

"Just think, mamma, ten whole days!" she cried in despair.

"But the time will pass quickly if you make up your mind to be
cheerful," said Mother Stuart.

"But I cannot go to the picnic to-morrow," said Lena sadly. "And just
think! it was a picnic that I helped to plan for."

"But you can watch the children as they play their games on the island,"
said Mother Stuart.

"Why, sure enough!" exclaimed Lena. "I can see them as they cross in
Cousin Rob's boat, right from our front windows. I hadn't thought of
that."

Just then a fine black spaniel ran up to Lena and pushed his nose
against her hand.

"And I have you, Waggy, to keep me company," said Lena more cheerfully
as she stroked the silky ears of the dog. "And, mamma, isn't it lucky
that I taught Waggy to go to the post office for the mail and to the
market for meat?"

"Very lucky for me," laughed Mother Stuart. "That will save me a few
extra steps."

Waggy had learned his lessons well. When he went to the meat market he
always carried a covered tin pail in which to carry home the meat, and
when he went to the post office, he was given a big leather wallet in
which to carry the letters.

The following afternoon Mrs. Stuart had an engagement with her dentist
and was compelled to leave Lena alone with Waggy. A kind neighbor had
lent Lena a wheel-chair so that she could travel from one part of the
house to the other. At two o'clock she began to watch for the picnickers
and at last saw them--five in all--run down the hill and get into her
Cousin Rob's boat and row out to the pretty island in the middle of the
river. Everyone knew that Cousin Rob was a good boatman and so fathers
and mothers did not worry when their sons and daughters went on the
water with him.

But on this day Rob was a little careless about pulling the boat up far
enough upon the island after all had landed. While the merry party was
on the other side of the island the boat floated away. Then to make
matters worse the sky suddenly became overcast with clouds telling of
the storm that was coming.

Lena saw what happened to the boat and presently she saw the five
picnickers hurrying toward the spot where they had left the boat. She
could imagine how they felt when they saw their boat floating down
stream.

"What can they do!" lamented Lena. "They will be soaked sure and perhaps
the river will rise and sweep them away."

In hard storms Lena had seen the water rise quickly and hide all of the
island except the bushes that grew upon it.

Lena could not telephone for help for there was no telephone in the
house. But she put her mind to work and thought of a way to rescue the
castaways.

"Come, Waggy," she called to her spaniel. "You must go to the market."

Lena wrote a message on a piece of paper and put it into the pail which
Waggy always carried when he went to the meat market.

"Mr. Jones," wrote Lena, "please send somebody to the island near our
house. Rob's boat has floated away and five friends of mine can't get
off the island. There's a big storm coming. Please be quick!"

Waggy took the note in his pail to the butcher thinking of course that
he was going to be given some meat to carry home. But he was surprised
to see Mr. Jones hurry away toward the river.

A little later Lena was overjoyed to see five very wet and draggled
friends of hers coming into her house to wait until the storm was over.

[Illustration: Lena was overjoyed to see five wet and draggled friends
of hers coming into her house.]




ON ACCOUNT OF THE BUNNIES.

BY EMMA C. DOWD.


Pauline looked through the picket fence and scowled.

"Oh, those poor little rabbits!" she whispered to herself. "I don't
believe that boy has fed them this morning. And now he's gone off to
play ball. It is a shame!" She glanced under the grape arbor, where some
chickweed was growing luxuriantly, and for a minute she hesitated. The
next, she was down among the chickweed, pulling it up by the handful.

She approached the fence again, looked cautiously around, to make sure
nobody was in sight, and then thrust the green stuff between the
pickets.

That first time of Pauline's feeding the rabbits was followed by a
second and a third, and finally it came to be a common thing for her to
peer through the fence to see if they were supplied with food, and if
not to carry them a good meal.

One morning Pauline was feeding them with celery tips, and, having
become a bit careless, stopped to see them enjoy their feast. When she
looked up she was disconcerted to see their owner watching her--only a
few feet away.

"I beg your pardon," she began, hesitatingly, "but I just thought I'd
bring your rabbits a little celery." And she turned to go.

[Illustration: John discovers Pauline feeding his rabbits.]

"Oh--I say--wait a minute!" he returned, as her foot touched the fence.
"So it's you that's been feeding them, is it? The fact is, I--forgot,
you know."

"I did feel sorry to see them hungry," confessed Pauline; "and I love
pets."

"Say, you may have a couple of 'em, if you want," he said generously.

"And I'll help you fix a pen," he added.

"Oh, thank you! I'd like them ever so much!" beamed Pauline. And there
was the beginning of a firm friendship between the small neighbors.

Pauline was to be satisfied with no such little makeshift as John gave
his own pets. Only the biggest sized dry-goods box would do for the
house itself, and the yard that he helped to fence off with wire netting
made him look disgustedly upon the tiny space allotted to the bunnies on
his side of the pickets.

When at last, Pauline's rabbits were in their new quarters. John gazed
at them thoughtfully.

"Say!" he suddenly burst out. "I'm going to have just such a place for
mine--big yard and all!"

"Oh, and I'll help you!" cried Pauline.

The new pen brought about other improvements. Tangled weeds and rubbish
heaps seemed most unsuitable surroundings for so dainty a little maid as
Pauline Randall; so John cut down the weeds and mowed the grass. He
raked up the brush and rags and tin cans. Pauline gave him slips from
her own geraniums, and he made a flower bed to put them in.

"Mother says she's awfully glad you fed my rabbits," he confided to
Pauline, one day, "for if you hadn't our yard would probably be the same
old place it has been for all these years."

Pauline looked up from the baby bunny she was petting. "I'm glad, too,"
she smiled. "If I hadn't, we might never have been friends."




SERVING THE QUEEN.

BY MARY E. JACKSON.


"Once upon a time, there was a brave little worker bee, who lived in a
big hive. She was strong and willing, and was ready to do anything. And
what do you think was the only thing required of her? She and a dozen
other bees were placed at the door of the hive, and were told to keep
their wings in motion, so as to send a steady current of air into the
inner cells of the hive where the queen was. The little worker bee was
disappointed, for she had wished to do some great service for her queen.

"She could see other workers hurrying about and doing such important
tasks! Some were making wax, and building the comb inside the hive;
others were providing food for the young bees, and still others were
feeding honey to the queen herself!

"Day by day the little worker grew more discontented, until one day the
queen sent a message to the tireless workers at the doorway. 'Tell
them,' she said, 'that they are doing me a wondrous service. Without the
air they are sending me, I could never live.'

"When the little worker heard this message, she took courage, and her
wings whirred as never before."

--_Selected._




OUR LESSON.--For April 26.

       *       *       *       *       *

PREPARED BY MARGUERITE COOK.

       *       *       *       *       *

Title.--The Lost Sheep and the Lost Coin.--Luke 15:1-10.

Golden Text.--There is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one
sinner that repenteth.--Luke 15:10.

_Golden Text for Beginners._--_God is love._--1 John 4:8.

Truth.--There is joy in heaven over every sinner saved.

1. The poor and sinful liked to hear Jesus talk.

2. The Pharisees and scribes found fault with Jesus because he let such
people come near him, and even ate with them.

[Illustration]

3. Jesus said that if a man had a hundred sheep and lost one, he would
leave the ninety-nine safe in the fold and go to find the lost one.

[Illustration]

4. When he found the sheep he would carry it home with joy.

5. He would ask his friends to rejoice with him.

[Illustration]

6. Jesus said that one sinner saved causes great joy in heaven.

[Illustration]

7. If a woman had ten pieces of money and lost one, she would bring a
light and sweep the house, and search until she found the lost piece.

8. When she found it she would want every one to be glad too, and would
call in her neighbors to rejoice with her.

9. Jesus said the angels rejoice over one sinner saved from sin.

10. Jesus loves to find and save sinners.

       *       *       *       *       *

QUESTIONS.

What is the Golden Text?

What is the Truth?

1. Who liked to hear Jesus talk?

2. Why did the Pharisees and scribes find fault?

3. If a man lost a sheep what would he do?

4. What would he do when he found it?

5. What would he ask his friends to do?

6. What did Jesus say would cause joy in heaven?

7. If a woman lost a piece of money, what would she do?

8. What would she do when she found it?

9. Over what do the angels rejoice?

10. What does Jesus love to do?

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON HYMN.

_Tune._--"Jesus loves me, this I know," omitting chorus (E flat).

     When from him we wander far,
     Jesus seeks us where we are;
     If we will obey his voice,
     Angels will o'er us rejoice.

       *       *       *       *       *

Title of Lesson for May 3.

The Prodigal Son (Temperance Lesson).--Luke 15:11-32.

       *       *       *       *       *

Golden Text for May 3.

I will arise and go to my father.--Luke 15:18.

       *       *       *       *       *

Beginners Golden Text for May 3.

_God is love._--1 John 4:8.




+---------------+
|               |
| Knowledge Box |
|               |
+---------------+

The First Safety-pin.


This is the way it came about. There was a little boy, by the name of
Harrison, who lived across the ocean in England, and because his mother
was busy with other work he often had to take care of his baby brother.
Very often the baby cried, but instead of scolding him, or calling to
his mother, that he couldn't do anything with the baby, Harrison would
try and find out what it was that made him cry. And very often he found
that it was because a pin was pricking him.

Now Harrison was not only patient with the baby, but he thought there
might be some way the pins could be bent so there would be no danger of
their pricking. He tried and tried for a long time to bend the pins so
they would be safe, but every time he failed. One day his father, who
was a blacksmith, asked him what he was doing. Harrison told him that he
was trying to bend a pin so it could not prick the baby.

"That is a good idea," said his rather. "I will see what I can do." For
his father knew that what would help his own baby would help all other
babies. So he, too, tried, and at last he made the safety-pin that is in
use all over the world. And though it was the father who finally made
it, the thought came to him from Harrison, and his thought grew from the
unselfish wish to made his baby brother comfortable. So we can truly say
that it was to a little boy, and to a little boy's kind thought, that we
owe the invention of the safety-pin.

--_Adele E. Thompson._




+----------------------+
|                      |
| Thoughts for Mothers |
|                      |
+----------------------+

Good Reading.


The habit of good reading once acquired will be of inestimable value to
a child all his life. Great care should be exercised at first that a
taste for good literature be not spoiled by an earlier perusal of the
more trashy stories so easily obtained.

See that the children have at hand the right kind of books. If they get
their books at a public library it is well to exercise a little
oversight over what is chosen.

Most librarians are always glad to talk with mothers and give a list of
the best books for children according to their ages. More personal
attention is likely to be given your children, too, if a talk has been
had with the librarian. Children sometimes draw out books presumably for
their parents which are not exactly suited to their own needs. Also
having a list of children's books yourself, you can always have a book
ready to suggest. It is wise not to say much about the books of which
you disapprove lest you implant the desire for the forbidden and
mysterious. It is better to suggest good books than to censor bad ones.

Reading aloud with the children from the best class of books is a
splendid way to cultivate a desire for them. It is often enjoyable to
read together what to read alone might seem a little heavy.

Some children will need no urging to read, but on the other hand will be
so fond of reading as to interfere with proper exercise and outdoor
play. Books on nature subjects will be good for these children for if
they become interested and learn to love the things of outdoors this in
itself will act as an antidote for over-bookishness.

Best and most important of all is to teach them a love and appreciation
of the Bible. It is our greatest literature, our truest guide to all
that is good in life. In it is a never-ending source of pleasure and
inspiration.




IN THE WOODS.


     In the woods the leaves are green,
     In the woods a golden sheen
       Falls upon the flowers;
     In the woods the robin gay
     Sings a happy roundelay,
       Perched in bloomy bowers.

     In the woods the squirrel flits
     High among the trees, or sits
       Basking in the light;
     In the woods I love to lie,
     Gazing at the blue, blue sky
       With its clouds so bright.

--_Lew Ward._




[Entered at the Post Office at Elgin, Ill., as Second Class Mail
Matter.]

Price of Dew Drops.--In lots of five or more, to one address 20 cents
per copy per year, or 5-1/2 cents per copy per quarter. Address,

DAVID C. COOK PUBLISHING CO., ELGIN, ILL.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Dew Drops Vol. 37. No. 17, April 26,
1914, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DEW DROPS VOL. 37. NO. 17, ***

***** This file should be named 14180.txt or 14180.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/4/1/8/14180/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Suzanne Lybarger and the PG Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
