The Project Gutenberg EBook of Peter's Pence, by W.W. Jacobs

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Peter's Pence
       Sailor's Knots, Part 8.

Author: W.W. Jacobs

Release Date: January 22, 2004 [EBook #10788]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PETER'S PENCE ***




Produced by David Widger




SAILORS' KNOTS

By W.W. Jacobs


1909



PETER'S PENCE


Sailormen don't bother much about their relations, as a rule, said the
night-watchman; sometimes because a railway-ticket costs as much as a
barrel o' beer, and they ain't got the money for both, and sometimes
because most relations run away with the idea that a sailorman has been
knocking about 'arf over the world just to bring them 'ome presents.

Then, agin, some relations are partikler about appearances, and they
don't like it if a chap don't wear a collar and tidy 'imself up.  Dress
is everything nowadays; put me in a top 'at and a tail-coat, with a
twopenny smoke stuck in my mouth, and who would know the difference
between me and a lord?  Put a bishop in my clothes, and you'd ask 'im to
'ave a 'arf-pint as soon as you would me--sooner, p'r'aps.

[Illustration: "Put a bishop in my clothes, and you'd ask 'im to 'ave a
'arf-pint as soon as you would me."]

Talking of relations reminds me of Peter Russet's uncle.  It's some years
ago now, and Peter and old Sam Small and Ginger Dick 'ad just come back
arter being away for nearly ten months.  They 'ad all got money in their
pockets, and they was just talking about the spree they was going to
have, when a letter was brought to Peter, wot had been waiting for 'im at
the office.

He didn't like opening it at fust.  The last letter he had 'ad kept 'im
hiding indoors for a week, and then made him ship a fortnight afore 'e
had meant to.  He stood turning it over and over, and at last, arter Sam,
wot was always a curious man, 'ad told 'im that if he didn't open it he'd
do it for 'im, he tore it open and read it.

"It's from my old uncle, George Goodman," he ses, staring.  "Why, I ain't
seen 'im for over twenty years."

"Do you owe 'im any money?"  ses Sam.

Peter shook his 'ead.  "He's up in London," he ses, looking at the letter
agin, "up in London for the fust time in thirty-three years, and he wants
to come and stay with me so that I can show 'im about."

"Wot is he?" ses Sam.

"He's retired," ses Peter, trying not to speak proud.

"Got money?" ses Sam, with a start.

"I b'leeve so," ses Peter, in a off-hand way.  "I don't s'pose 'e lives
on air."

"Any wives or children?" ses Sam.

"No," ses Peter.  "He 'ad a wife, but she died."

"Then you have 'im, Peter," ses Sam, wot was always looking out for
money.  "Don't throw away a oppertunity like that.  Why, if you treat 'im
well he might leave it all to you."

"No such luck," ses Peter.

"You do as Sam ses," ses Ginger.  "I wish I'd got an uncle."

"We'll try and give 'im a good time," ses Sam, "and if he's anything like
Peter we shall enjoy ourselves."

"Yes; but he ain't," ses Peter.  "He's a very solemn, serious-minded man,
and a strong teetotaller.  Wot you'd call a glass o' beer he'd call
pison.  That's 'ow he got on.  He's thought a great deal of in 'is place,
I can tell you, but he ain't my sort."

"That's a bit orkard," ses Sam, scratching his 'ead.  "Same time, it
don't do to throw away a chance.  If 'e was my uncle I should pretend to
be a teetotaller while 'e was here, just to please 'im."

"And when you felt like a drink, Peter," ses Ginger, "me and Sam would
look arter 'im while you slipped off to get it."

"He could 'ave the room below us," ses Sam.  "It is empty."

Peter gave a sniff.  "Wot about you and Ginger?"  he ses.

"Wot about us?" ses Sam and Ginger, both together.

"Why, you'd 'ave to be teetotallers, too," ses Peter.  "Woes the good o'
me pretending to be steady if 'e sees I've got pals like you?"

Sam scratched his 'ead agin, ever so long, and at last he ses, "Well,
mate," he ses, "drink don't trouble me nor Ginger.  We can do without it,
as far as that goes; and we must all take it in turns to keep the old
gentleman busy while the others go and get wot they want.  You'd better
go and take the room downstairs for 'im, afore it goes."

Peter looked at 'im in surprise, but that was Sam all over.  The idea o'
knowing a man with money was too much for 'im, and he sat there giving
good advice to Peter about 'is behavior until Peter didn't know whether
it was 'is uncle or Sam's.  'Owever, he took the room and wrote the
letter, and next arternoon at three o'clock Mr. Goodman came in a four-
wheel cab with a big bag and a fat umbrella.  A short, stiffish-built man
of about sixty he was, with 'is top lip shaved and a bit o' short gray
beard.  He 'ad on a top 'at and a tail-coat, black kid gloves and a
little black bow, and he didn't answer the cabman back a single word.

[Illustration: "Mr. Goodman came in a four-wheel cab with a big bag and a
fat umbrella."]

He seemed quite pleased to see Peter, and by and by Sam, who was bursting
with curiosity, came down-stairs to ask Peter to lend 'im a boot-lace,
and was interduced.  Then Ginger came down to look for Sam, and in a few
minutes they was all talking as comfortable as possible.

"I ain't seen Peter for twenty years," ses Mr. Goodman--"twenty long
years!"

Sam shook his 'ead and looked at the floor.

"I happened to go and see Peter's sister--my niece Polly," ses Mr.
Goodman, "and she told me the name of 'is ship.  It was quite by chance,
because she told me it was the fust letter she had 'ad from him in seven
years."

"I didn't think it was so long as that," ses Peter.  "Time passes so
quick."

His uncle nodded.  "Ah, so it does," 'e ses.  "It's all the same whether
we spend it on the foaming ocean or pass our little lives ashore.  Afore
we can turn round, in a manner o' speaking, it 'as gorn."

"The main thing," ses Peter, in a good voice, "is to pass it properly."

"Then it don't matter," ses Ginger.

"So it don't," ses Sam, very serious.

"I held 'im in my arms when 'e was a baby," ses Mr. Goodman, looking at
Peter.

"Fond o' children?" ses Sam.

Mr. Goodman nodded.  "Fond of everybody," he ses.

"That's 'ow Peter is," ses Ginger; "specially young----"

Peter Russet and Sam both turned and looked at 'im very sharp.

"Children," ses Ginger, remembering 'imself, "_and_ teetotallers.  I
s'pose it is being a teetotaller 'imself."

"Is Peter a teetotaller?" ses Mr. Goodman.  "I'd no idea of it.  Wot a
joyful thing!"

"It was your example wot put it into his 'ead fust, I b'leeve," ses Sam,
looking at Peter for 'im to notice 'ow clever he was.

"And then, Sam and Ginger Dick being teetotallers too," ses Peter, "we
all, natural-like, keep together."

Mr. Goodman said they was wise men, and, arter a little more talk, he
said 'ow would it be if they went out and saw a little bit of the great
wicked city?  They all said they would, and Ginger got quite excited
about it until he found that it meant London.

They got on a bus at Aldgate, and fust of all they went to the British
Museum, and when Mr. Goodman was tired o' that--and long arter the others
was--they went into a place and 'ad a nice strong cup of tea and a piece
o' cake each.  When they come out o' there they all walked about looking
at the shops until they was tired out, and arter wot Mr. Goodman said was
a very improving evening they all went 'ome.

Sam and Ginger went 'ome just for the look 'o the thing, and arter
waiting a few minutes in their room they crept downstairs agin to spend
wot was left of the evening.  They went down as quiet as mice, but, for
all that, just as they was passing Mr. Goodman's room the door opened,
and Peter, in a polite voice, asked 'em to step inside.

"We was just thinking you'd be dull up there all alone," he ses.

Sam lost 'is presence o' mind, and afore he knew wot 'e was doing 'im and
Ginger 'ad walked in and sat down.  They sat there for over an hour and a
'arf talking, and then Sam, with a look at Ginger, said they must be
going, because he 'ad got to call for a pair o' boots he 'ad left to be
mended.

"Why, Sam, wot are you thinking of?" ses Peter, who didn't want anybody
to 'ave wot he couldn't.  "Why, the shop's shut."

"I don't think so," ses Sam, glaring at 'im.  "Anyway, we can go and
see."

Peter said he'd go with 'im, and just as they got to the door Mr. Goodman
said he'd go too.  O' course, the shops was shut, and arter Mr. Goodman
'ad stood on Tower Hill admiring the Tower by moonlight till Sam felt
ready to drop, they all walked back.  Three times Sam's boot-lace come
undone, but as the ethers all stopped too to see 'im do it up it didn't
do 'im much good.  Wot with temper and dryness 'e could 'ardly bid Peter
"Good-night."

Sam and Ginger 'ad something the next morning, but morning ain't the time
for it; and arter they had 'ad dinner Mr. Goodman asked 'em to go to the
Zoological Gardens with 'im.  He paid for them all, and he 'ad a lot to
say about kindness to animals and 'ow you could do anything with 'em
a'most by kindness.  He walked about the place talking like a book, and
when a fat monkey, wot was pretending to be asleep, got a bit o' Sam's
whisker, he said it was on'y instink, and the animal had no wish to do
'im 'arm.

"Very likely thought it was doing you a kindness, Sam," ses Ginger.

Mr. Goodman said it was very likely, afore Sam could speak, and arter
walking about and looking at the other things they come out and 'ad a
nice, strong, 'ot cup o' tea, same as they 'ad the day before, and then
walked about, not knowing what to do with themselves.

Sam got tired of it fust, and catching Ginger's eye said he thought it
was time to get 'ome in case too much enjoyment wasn't good for 'em.  His
idea was to get off with Ginger and make a night of it, and when 'e found
Peter and his uncle was coming too, he began to think that things was
looking serious.

"I don't want to spile your evening," he says, very perlite.  "I must get
'ome to mend a pair o' trowsis o' mine, but there's no need for you to
come."

"I'll come and watch you," ses Peter's uncle.

"And then I'm going off to bed early," ses Sam.  "Me, too," ses Ginger,
and Peter said he could hardly keep 'is eyes open.

They got on a bus, and as Sam was about to foller Ginger and Peter on
top, Mr. Goodman took hold of 'im by the arm and said they'd go inside.
He paid two penny fares, and while Sam was wondering 'ow to tell 'im that
it would be threepence each, the bus stopped to take up a passenger and
he got up and moved to the door.

"They've gone up there," he ses, pointing.

Afore Sam could stop 'im he got off, and Sam, full o' surprise, got off
too, and follered 'im' on to the pavement.

"Who's gone up there?"  he ses, as the bus went on agin.

"Peter and Mr. Ginger Dick," ses Mr. Good-man.  "But don't you trouble.
You go 'ome and mend your trowsis."

"But they're on the bus," ses Sam, staring.  "Dick and Peter, I mean."

Mr. Goodman shook his 'ead.

"They got off.  Didn't you see 'em?"  he ses.  "No," ses Sam, "I'll swear
they didn't."

"Well, it's my mistake, I s'pose," ses Peter's uncle.  "But you get off
home; I'm not tired yet, and I'll walk."

Sam said 'e wasn't very tired, and he walked along wondering whether Mr.
Goodman was quite right in his 'ead.  For one thing, 'e seemed upset
about something or other, and kept taking little peeps at 'im in a way he
couldn't understand at all.

"It was nice tea we 'ad this arternoon," ses Mr. Goodman at last.

"De-licious," ses Sam.

"Trust a teetotaller for knowing good tea," ses Mr. Goodman.  "I expect
Peter enjoyed it.  I s'pose 'e is a very strict teetotaller?"

"Strict ain't the word for it," ses Sam, trying to do 'is duty by Peter.
"We all are."

"That's right," ses Mr. Goodman, and he pushed his 'at back and looked at
Sam very serious.  They walked on a bit further, and then Peter's uncle
stopped sudden just as they was passing a large public-'ouse and looked
at Sam.

"I don't want Peter to know, 'cos it might alarm 'im," he ses, "but I've
come over a bit faint.  I'll go in 'ere for 'arf a minnit and sit down.
You'd better wait outside."

"I'll come in with you, in case you want help," ses Sam.  "I don't mind
wot people think."

Mr. Goodman tried to persuade 'im not to, but it was all no good, and at
last 'e walked in and sat down on a tall stool that stood agin the bar,
and put his hand to his 'ead.

"I s'pose we shall 'ave to 'ave something," he ses in a whisper to Sam;
"we can't expect to come in and sit down for nothing.  What'll you take?"

Sam looked at 'im, but he might just as well ha' looked at a brass door-
knob.

"I--I--I'll 'ave a small ginger-beer," he ses at last, "a very small
one."

"One small ginger," ses Mr. Goodman to the bar-maid, "and one special
Scotch."

Sam could 'ardly believe his ears, and he stood there 'oldin' his glass
o' ginger-beer and watching Peter's teetotal uncle drink whiskey, and
thought 'e must be dreaming.

"I dessay it seems very shocking to you," ses Mr. Goodman, putting down
'is glass and dryin' 'is lips on each other, "but I find it useful for
these attacks."

"I--I s'pose the flavor's very nasty?" ses Sam, taking a sip at 'is
ginger-beer.

"Not exactly wot you could call nasty," ses Mr. Goodman, "though I dessay
it would seem so to you.  I don't suppose you could swallow it."

"I don't s'pose I could," ses Sam, "but I've a good mind to 'ave a try.
If it's good for one teetotaller I don't see why it should hurt another."

Mr. Goodman looked at 'im very hard, and then he ordered a whiskey and
stood watching while Sam, arter pretending for a minnit to look at it as
though 'e didn't know wot to do with it, took a sip and let it roll round
'is mouth.

"Well?"  ses Mr. Goodman, looking at 'im anxious-like.

"It ain't so 'orrid as I 'ad fancied," ses Sam, lap-ping up the rest very
gentle.

[Illustration: "'It aint so 'orrid as I 'ad fancied.'  ses Sam."]

"'Ave you 'ad enough to do you all the good it ought to?"

Mr. Goodman said that it was no good 'arf doing a thing, and p'r'aps he
'ad better 'ave one more; and arter Sam 'ad paid for the next two they
went out arm-in-arm.

"'Ow cheerful everybody looks!" ses Mr. Good-man, smiling.

"They're going to amuse theirselves, I expect," ses Sam-- "music-'alls
and such-like."

Mr. Goodman shook his 'ead at 'em.

"Music-'alls ain't so bad as some people try to make out," ses Sam.

"Look 'ere; I took some drink to see what the flavor was like; suppose
you go to a music-'all to see wot that's like?"

"It seems on'y fair," ses Peter's uncle, considering.

"It is fair," ses Sam, and twenty minutes arterwards they was sitting in
a music-'all drinking each other's 'ealths and listening to the songs--
Mr. Goodman with a big cigar in 'is mouth and his 'at cocked over one
eye, and Sam beating time to the music with 'is pipe.

"'Ow do you like it?"  he ses.

Mr. Goodman didn't answer 'im because 'e was joining in the chorus with
one side of 'is mouth and keeping 'is cigar alight with the other.  He
just nodded at 'im; but 'e looked so 'appy that Sam felt it was a
pleasure to sit there and look at 'im.

"I wonder wot Peter and Ginger is doin'?" he ses, when the song was
finished.

"I don't know," ses Mr. Goodman, "and, wot's more, I don't care.  If I'd
'ad any idea that Peter was like wot he is I should never 'ave wrote to
'im.  I can't think 'ow you can stand 'im."

"He ain't so bad," ses Sam, wondering whether he ought to tell 'im 'arf
of wot Peter really was like.

"Bad!" ses Mr. Goodman.  "I come up to London for a 'oliday--a change,
mind you--and I thought Peter and me was going to 'ave a good time.
Instead o' that, he goes about with a face as long as a fiddle.  He don't
drink, 'e don't go to places of amusement--innercent places of amusement
--and 'is idea of enjoying life is to go walking about the streets and
drinking cups o' tea."

"We must try and alter 'im," ses Sam, arter doing a bit o' thinking.

"Certainly not," ses Mr. Goodman, laying his 'and on Sam's knee.  "Far be
it from me to interfere with a feller-creature's ideas o' wot's right.
Besides, he might get writing to 'is sister agin, and she might tell my
wife."

"But Peter said she was dead," ses Sam, very puzzled.

"I married agin," ses Peter's uncle, in a whisper, 'cos people was
telling 'im to keep quiet, "a tartar--a perfect tartar.  She's in a
'orsepittle at present, else I shouldn't be 'ere.  And I shouldn't ha'
been able to come if I 'adn't found five pounds wot she'd hid in a
match-box up the chimbley."

"But wot'll you do when she finds it out?" ses Sam, opening 'is eyes.

"I'm going to 'ave the house cleaned and the chimbleys swept to welcome
her 'ome," ses Mr. Goodman, taking a sip o' whiskey.  "It'll be a little
surprise for her."

They stayed till it was over, and on the bus he gave Sam some strong
peppermint lozenges wot 'e always carried about with 'im, and took some
'imself.  He said 'e found 'em helpful.

"What are we going to tell Peter and Ginger?" ses Sam, as they got near
the 'ouse.

"Tell 'em?"  ses Mr. Goodman.  "Tell 'em the truth.  How we follered 'em
when they got off the bus, and 'ave been looking for 'em ever since.  I'm
not going to 'ave my 'oliday spoilt by a teetotal nevvy, I can tell you."

He started on Peter, wot was sitting on his bed with Ginger waiting for
them, the moment he got inside, and all Ginger and Peter could say didn't
make any difference.

"Mr. Small see you as plain as what I did," he ses.

"Plainer," ses Sam.

"But I tell you we come straight 'ome," ses Ginger, "and we've been
waiting for you 'ere ever since."

Mr. Goodman shook his 'ead at 'im.  "Say no more about it," he ses, in a
kind voice.  "I dessay it's rather tiresome for young men to go about
with two old ones, and in future, if you and Peter keep together, me and
my friend Mr. Small will do the same."

Sam shook 'ands with 'im, and though Peter tried his 'ardest to make 'im
alter his mind it was no good.  His uncle patted 'im on the shoulder, and
said they'd try it for a few days, at any rate, and Ginger, wot thought
it was a very good idea, backed 'im up.  Everybody seemed pleased with
the idea except Peter Russet, but arter Sam 'ad told 'im in private wot a
high opinion 'is uncle 'ad got of 'im, and 'ow well off he was, 'e gave
way.

They all enjoyed the next evening, and Sam and Mr. Goodman got on
together like twin brothers.  They went to a place of amusement every
night, and the on'y unpleasantness that happened was when Peter's uncle
knocked a chemist's shop up at a quarter-past twelve one night to buy a
penn'orth o' peppermint lozenges.

They 'ad four of the 'appiest evenings together that Sam 'ad ever known;
and Mr. Goodman would 'ave been just as 'appy too if it hadn't ha' been
for the thoughts o' that five pounds.  The more 'e thought of it the more
unlikely it seemed that 'is wife would blame it on to the sweep, and one
night he took the match-box out of 'is pocket and shook his 'ead over it
till Sam felt quite sorry for 'im.

"Don't take up your troubles afore they come," he ses.  "Orsepittles are
dangerous places."

Mr. Goodman cheered up a bit at that, but he got miserable agin the next
night because 'is money was getting low and he wanted another week in
London.

"I've got seven shillings and fourpence and two stamps left," he ses.
"Where it's all gone to I can't think."

"Don't you worry about that," ses Sam.  "I've got a pound or two left
yet."

"No, I ain't going to be a burden on you," ses Mr. Goodman, "but another
week I must 'ave, so I must get the money somehow.  Peter can't spend
much, the way he goes on."

Sam gave a little cough.

"I'll get a pound or two out of 'im," ses Mr. Goodman.

Sam coughed agin.  "Won't he think it rather funny?"  he ses, arter a
bit.

"Not if it's managed properly," ses Mr. Good-man, thinking 'ard.  "I'll
tell you 'ow we'll do it.  To-morrow morning, while we are eating of our
breakfast, you ask me to lend you a pound or two."

Sam, what 'ad just taken up 'is glass for a drink, put it down agin and
stared at 'im.

"But I don't want no money," he ses; "and, besides, you 'aven't got any."

"You do as I tell you," ses Mr. Goodman, "and when you've got it, you
hand it over to me, see?  Ask me to lend you five pounds."

Sam thought as 'ow the whiskey 'ad got to Mr. Goodman's 'ead at last.
'Owever, to pacify 'im he promised to do wot 'e was told, and next
morning, when they was all at breakfast, he looks over and catches Mr.
Goodman's eye.

"I wonder if I might be so bold as to ask a favor of you?"  he ses.

"Certainly," ses Peter's uncle, "and glad I shall be to oblige you.
There is no man I've got a greater respect for."

"Thankee," ses Sam.  "The fact is, I've run a bit short owing to paying a
man some money I owed 'im.  If you could lend me five pounds, I couldn't
thank you enough."

Mr. Goodman put down 'is knife and fork and wrinkled up 'is forehead.

"I'm very sorry," he ses, feeling in 'is pockets; "do you want it
to-day?"

"Yes; I should like it," ses Sam.

"It's most annoying," ses Mr. Goodman, "but I was so afraid o'
pickpockets that I didn't bring much away with me.  If you could wait
till the day arter to-morrow, when my money is sent to me, you can 'ave
ten if you like."

"You're very kind," ses Sam, "but that 'ud be too late for me.  I must
try and get it somewhere else."  Peter and Ginger went on eating their
breakfast, but every time Peter looked up he caught 'is uncle looking at
'im in such a surprised and disappointed sort o' way that 'e didn't like
the look of it at all.

"I could just do it for a couple o' days, Sam," he ses at last, "but
it'll leave me very short."

"That's right," ses his uncle, smiling.  "My nevvy, Peter Russet, will
lend it to you, Mr. Small, of 'is own free will.  He 'as offered afore he
was asked, and that's the proper way to do it, in my opinion."

He reached acrost the table and shook 'ands with Peter, and said that
generosity ran in their family, and something seemed to tell 'im as Peter
wouldn't lose by it.  Everybody seemed pleased with each other, and arter
Ginger Dick and Peter 'ad gone out Mr. Goodman took the five pounds off
of old Sam and stowed 'em away very careful in the match-box.

[Illustration: "He reached acrost the table and shook 'ands with Peter."]

"It's nice to 'ave money agin," he ses.  "There's enough for a week's
enjoyment here."

"Yes," ses Sam, slow-like; "but wot I want to know is, wot about the day
arter to-morrow, when Peter expects 'is money?"

Mr. Goodman patted 'im on the shoulder.  "Don't you worry about Peter's
troubles," he ses.  "I know exactly wot to do; it's all planned out.  Now
I'm going to 'ave a lay down for an hour--I didn't get much sleep last
night--and if you'll call me at twelve o'clock we'll go somewhere.  Knock
loud."

He patted 'im on the shoulder agin, and Sam, arter fidgeting about a bit,
went out.  The last time he ever see Peter's uncle he was laying on the
bed with 'is eyes shut, smiling in his sleep.  And Peter Russet didn't
see Sam for eighteen months.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Peter's Pence, by W.W. Jacobs

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PETER'S PENCE ***

***** This file should be named 10788.txt or 10788.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/7/8/10788/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


