Project Gutenberg's Diary of Samuel Pepys, January 1668/69, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, January 1668/69

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: November 28, 2004 [EBook #4196]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.

                                1669 N.S.

                                 JANUARY
                                1668-1669

January 1st.  Up, and presented from Captain Beckford with a noble silver
warming-pan, which I am doubtful whether to take or no.  Up, and with W.
Hewer to the New Exchange, and then he and I to the cabinet-shops, to look
out, and did agree, for a cabinet to give my wife for a New-year's gift;
and I did buy one cost me L11, which is very pretty, of walnutt-tree, and
will come home to-morrow.  So back to the old Exchange, and there met my
uncle Wight; and there walked, and met with the Houblons, and talked with
them--gentlemen whom I honour mightily: and so to my uncle's, and met my
wife; and there, with W. Hewer, we dined with our family, and had a very
good dinner, and pretty merry and after dinner, my wife and I with our
coach to the King's playhouse, and there in a box saw "The Mayden Queene."
Knepp looked upon us, but I durst not shew her any countenance; and, as
well as I could carry myself, I found my wife uneasy there, poor wretch!
therefore, I shall avoid that house as much as I can.  So back to my
aunt's, and there supped and talked, and staid pretty late, it being dry
and moonshine, and so walked home, and to bed in very good humour.

2nd.  Up, at the office all the morning, and at noon home to dinner, where
I find my cabinet come home, and paid for it, and it pleases me and my
wife well.  So after dinner busy late at the office, and so home and to
bed.

3rd (Lord's day).  Up, and busy all the morning, getting rooms and dinner
ready for my guests, which were my uncle and aunt Wight, and two of their
cousins, and an old woman, and Mr. Mills and his wife; and a good dinner,
and all our plate out, and mighty fine and merry, only I a little vexed at
burning a new table-cloth myself, with one of my trencher-salts. Dinner
done, I out with W. Hewer and Mr. Spong, who by accident come to dine with
me, and good talk with him: to White Hall by coach, and there left him,
and I with my Lord Brouncker to attend the Duke of York, and then up and
down the House till the evening, hearing how the King do intend this
frosty weather, it being this day the first, and very hard frost, that
hath come this year, and very cold it is.  So home; and to supper and
read; and there my wife and I treating about coming to an allowance to my
wife for clothes; and there I, out of my natural backwardness, did hang
off, which vexed her, and did occasion some discontented talk in bed, when
we went to bed; and also in the morning, but I did recover all in the
morning.

4th.  Lay long, talking with my wife, and did of my own accord come to an
allowance of her of L30 a-year for all expences, clothes and everything,
which she was mightily pleased with, it being more than ever she asked or
expected, and so rose, with much content, and up with W. Hewer to White
Hall, there to speak with Mr. Wren, which I did about several things of
the office entered in my memorandum books, and so about noon, going
homeward with W. Hewer, he and I went in and saw the great tall woman that
is to be seen, who is but twenty-one years old, and I do easily stand
under her arms.  Then, going further, The. Turner called me, out of her
coach where her mother, &c., was, and invited me by all means to dine with
them, at my cozen Roger's mistress's, the widow Dickenson!  So, I went to
them afterwards, and dined with them, and mighty handsomely treated, and
she a wonderful merry, good-humoured, fat, but plain woman, but I believe
a very good woman, and mighty civil to me.  Mrs. Turner, the mother, and
Mrs. Dyke, and The., and Betty was the company, and a gentleman of their
acquaintance.  Betty I did long to see, and she is indifferent pretty, but
not what the world did speak of her; but I am mighty glad to have one so
pretty of our kindred.  After dinner, I walked with them, to shew them the
great woman, which they admire, as well they may; and so back with them,
and left them; and I to White Hall, where a Committee of Tangier met, but
little to do there, but I did receive an instance of the Duke of York's
kindness to me, and the whole Committee, that they would not order any
thing about the Treasurer for the Corporation now in establishing, without
my assent, and considering whether it would be to my wrong or no.  Thence
up and down the house, and to the Duke of York's side, and there in the
Duchess's presence; and was mightily complimented by my Lady Peterborough,
in my Lord Sandwich's presence, whom she engaged to thank me for my
kindness to her and her Lord.  .  .  .  By and by I met my Lord Brouncker;
and he and I to the Duke of York alone, and discoursed over the carriage
of the present Treasurers, in opposition to, or at least independency of,
the Duke of York, or our Board, which the Duke of York is sensible of, and
all remember, I believe; for they do carry themselves very respectlessly
of him and us.  We also declared our minds together to the Duke of York
about Sir John Minnes's incapacity to do any service in the Office, and
that it is but to betray the King to have any business of trust committed
to his weakness.  So the Duke of York was very sensible of it and promised
to speak to the King about it.  That done, I with W. Hewer took up my wife
at Unthank's, and so home, and there with pleasure to read and talk, and
so to supper, and put into writing, in merry terms, our agreement between
my wife and me, about L30 a-year, and so to bed.  This was done under both
our hands merrily, and put into W. Hewer's to keep.

5th.  Up, and to the office all the morning, the frost and cold
continuing.  At noon home with my people to dinner; and so to work at the
office again; in the evening comes Creed to me, and tells me his wife is
at my house.  So I in, and spent an hour with them, the first time she
hath been here, or I have seen her, since she was married.  She is not
overhandsome, though a good lady, and one I love.  So after some pleasant
discourse, they gone, I to the Office again, and there late, and then home
to supper to my wife, who is not very well of those, and so sat talking
till past one in the morning, and then to bed.

6th (Twelfth day).  Up, and to look after things against dinner to-day for
my guests, and then to the Office to write down my journall for five or
six days backward, and so home to look after dinner, it being now almost
noon.  At noon comes Mrs. Turner and Dyke, and Mrs. Dickenson, and then
comes The. and Betty Turner, the latter of which is a very pretty girl;
and then Creed and his wife, whom I sent for, by my coach. These were my
guests, and Mrs. Turner's friend, whom I saw the other day, Mr. Wicken,
and very merry we were at dinner, and so all the afternoon, talking, and
looking up and down my house; and in the evening I did bring out my
cake--a noble cake, and there cut it into pieces, with wine and good
drink: and after a new fashion, to prevent spoiling the cake, did put so
many titles into a hat, and so drew cuts; and I was the Queene; and The.
Turner, King--Creed, Sir Martin Marr-all; and Betty, Mrs. Millicent: and
so we were mighty merry till it was night; and then, being moonshine and
fine frost, they went home, I lending some of them my coach to help to
carry them, and so my wife and I spent the rest of the evening in talk and
reading, and so with great pleasure to bed.

7th.  Up, and to the office, where busy all the morning, and then at noon
home to dinner, and thence my wife and I to the King's playhouse, and
there saw "The Island Princesse," the first time I ever saw it; and it is
a pretty good play, many good things being in it, and a good scene of a
town on fire.  We sat in an upper box, and the jade Nell come and sat in
the next box; a bold merry slut, who lay laughing there upon people; and
with a comrade of hers of the Duke's house, that come in to see the play.
Thence home and to the office to do some business, and so home to supper
and to bed.

8th.  Up, and with Colonel Middleton, in his coach, and Mr. Tippets to
White Hall; and there attended the Duke of York with the rest, where the
Duke was mighty plain with the Treasurers, according to the advice my Lord
Brouncker and I did give him the other night, and he did it fully; and so
as, I believe, will make the Treasurers carefull of themselves, unless
they do resolve upon defying the Duke of York.  Thence with W. Hewer home,
and to dinner, and so out again, my wife and I and Mr. Hater to White
Hall, where she set us down, and she up and down to buy things, while we
at the Treasury-Chamber, where I alone did manage the business of "The
Leopard" against the whole Committee of the East India Company,  with Mr.
Blackburne with them; and to the silencing of them all, to my no great
content.  Thence walked to my wife, and so set out for home in our coach,
it being very cold weather, and so to the office to do a little business,
and then home to my wife's chamber, my people having laid the cloth, and
got the rooms all clean above-stairs to-night for our dinner to-morrow,
and therefore I to bed.

9th.  Up, and at the office all the morning, and at noon, my Lord
Brouncker, Mr. Wren, Joseph Williamson, and Captain Cocke, dined with me;
and, being newly sat down, comes in, by invitation of Williamson's, the
Lieutenant of the Tower, and he brings in with him young Mr. Whore, whose
father, of the Tower, I know.--And here I had a neat dinner, and all in so
good manner and fashion, and with so good company, and everything to my
mind, as I never had more in my life--the company being to my heart's
content, and they all well pleased.  So continued, looking over my books
and closet till the evening, and so I to the Office and did a good deal of
business, and so home to supper and to bed with my mind mightily pleased
with this day's management, as one of the days of my life of fullest
content.

10th (Lord's day).  Accidentally talking of our maids before we rose, I
said a little word that did give occasion to my wife to fall out; and she
did most vexatiously, almost all the morning, but ended most perfect good
friends; but the thoughts of the unquiet which her ripping up of old
faults will give me, did make me melancholy all day long.  So about noon,
past 12, we rose, and to dinner, and then to read and talk, my wife and I
alone, for Balty was gone, who come to dine with us, and then in the
evening comes Pelting to sit and talk with us, and so to supper and pretty
merry discourse, only my mind a little vexed at the morning's work, but
yet without any appearance.  So after supper to bed.

11th.  Up, and with W. Hewer, my guard, to White Hall, where no Committee
of Tangier met, so up and down the House talking with this and that man,
and so home, calling at the New Exchange for a book or two to send to Mr.
Shepley and thence home, and thence to the 'Change, and there did a little
business, and so walked home to dinner, and then abroad with my wife to
the King's playhouse, and there saw "The Joviall Crew," but ill acted to
what it was heretofore, in Clun's time, and when Lacy could dance.  Thence
to the New Exchange, to buy some things; and, among others, my wife did
give me my pair of gloves, which, by contract, she is to give me in her
L30 a-year.  Here Mrs. Smith tells us of the great murder thereabouts, on
Saturday last, of one Captain Bumbridge, by one Symons, both of her
acquaintance; and hectors that were at play, and in drink: the former is
killed, and is kinsman to my Lord of Ormond, which made him speak of it
with so much passion, as I overheard him this morning, but could not make
anything of it till now, but would they would kill more of them.  So home;
and there at home all the evening; and made Tom to prick down some little
conceits and notions of mine, in musique, which do mightily encourage me
to spend some more thoughts about it; for I fancy, upon good reason, that
I am in the right way of unfolding the mystery of this matter, better than
ever yet.

12th.  Up, and to the Office, where, by occasion of a message from the
Treasurers that their Board found fault with Commissioner Middleton, I
went up from our Board to the Lords of the Treasury to meet our
Treasurers, and did, and there did dispute the business, it being about
the matter of paying a little money to Chatham Yard, wherein I find the
Treasurers mighty supple, and I believe we shall bring them to reason,
though they begun mighty upon us, as if we had no power of directing them,
but they, us.  Thence back presently home, to dinner, where I discern my
wife to have been in pain about where I have been, but said nothing to me,
but I believe did send W. Hewer to seek me, but I take no notice of it,
but am vexed.  So to dinner with my people, and then to the Office, where
all the afternoon, and did much business, and at it late, and so home to
supper, and to bed.  This day, meeting Mr. Pierce at White Hall, he tells
me that his boy hath a great mind to see me, and is going to school again;
and Dr. Clerke, being by, do tell me that he is a fine boy; but I durst
not answer anything, because I durst not invite him to my house, for fear
of my wife; and therefore, to my great trouble, was forced to neglect that
discourse.  But here Mr. Pierce, I asking him whither he was going, told
me as a great secret that he was going to his master's mistress, Mrs.
Churchill, with some physic; meaning for the pox I suppose, or else that
she is got with child.  This evening I observed my wife mighty dull, and I
myself was not mighty fond, because of some hard words she did give me at
noon, out of a jealousy at my being abroad this morning, which, God knows,
it was upon the business of the Office unexpectedly: but I to bed, not
thinking but she would come after me. But waking by and by out of a
slumber, which I usually fall into presently after my coming into the bed,
I found she did not prepare to come to bed, but got fresh candles, and
more wood for her fire, it being mighty cold, too.  At this being
troubled, I after a while prayed her to come to bed, all my people being
gone to bed; so, after an hour or two, she silent, and I now and then
praying her to come to bed, she fell out into a fury, that I was a rogue,
and false to her.  But yet I did perceive that she was to seek what to
say, only she invented, I believe, a business that I was seen in a hackney
coach with the glasses up with Deb., but could not tell the time, nor was
sure I was he.  I did, as I might truly, deny it, and was mightily
troubled, but all would not serve. At last, about one o'clock, she come to
my side of the bed, and drew my curtaine open, and with the tongs red hot
at the ends, made as if she did design to pinch me with them, at which, in
dismay, I rose up, and with a few words she laid them down; and did by
little and, little, very sillily, let all the discourse fall; and about
two, but with much seeming difficulty, come to bed, and there lay well all
night, and long in bed talking together, with much pleasure, it being, I
know, nothing but her doubt of my going out yesterday, without telling her
of my going, which did vex her, poor wretch! last night, and I cannot
blame her jealousy, though it do vex me to the heart.

13th.  So up and by coach to Sir W. Coventry's, but he gone out, so I to
White Hall, and thence walked out into the Park, all in the snow, with the
Duke of York and the rest, and so home, after visiting my Lady
Peterborough, and there by invitation find Mr. Povy, and there was also
Talbot Pepys, newly come from Impington, and dined with me; and after
dinner and a little talk with Povy about publick matters, he gone, and I
and my wife and Talbot towards the Temple, and there to the King's
playhouse, and there saw, I think, "The Maiden Queene," and so home and to
supper and read, and to bed.  This day come home the instrument I have so
long longed for, the Parallelogram.

14th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning busy, and so home to
dinner, where Goodgroome with us, and after dinner a song, and then to the
office, where busy till night, and then home to work there with W. Hewer
to get ready some Tangier papers against to-morrow, and so to supper and
to bed.

15th.  Up, and by coach to Sir W. Coventry, where with him a good while in
his chamber, talking of one thing or another; among others, he told me of
the great factions at Court at this day, even to the sober engaging of
great persons, and differences, and making the King cheap and ridiculous.
It is about my Lady Harvy's being offended at Doll Common's acting of
Sempronia, to imitate her; for which she got my Lord Chamberlain, her
kinsman, to imprison Doll: when my Lady Castlemayne made the King to
release her, and to order her to act it again, worse than ever, the other
day, where the King himself was: and since it was acted again, and my Lady
Harvy provided people to hiss her and fling oranges at her: but, it seems
the heat is come to a great height, and real troubles at Court about it.
Thence he and I out of doors, but he to Sir J. Duncomb, and I to White
Hall through the Park, where I met the King and the Duke of York, and so
walked with them, and so to White Hall, where the Duke of York met the
office and did a little business; and I did give him thanks for his favour
to me yesterday, at the Committee of Tangier, in my absence, Mr. Povy
having given me advice of it, of the discourse there of doing something as
to the putting the payment of the garrison into some undertaker's hand,
Alderman Backewell, which the Duke of York would not suffer to go on,
without my presence at the debate.  And he answered me just thus: that he
ought to have a care of him that do the King's business in the manner that
I do, and words of more force than that. Then down with Lord Brouncker to
Sir R. Murray, into the King's little elaboratory, under his closet, a
pretty place; and there saw a great many chymical glasses and things, but
understood none of them.  So I home and to dinner, and then out again and
stop with my wife at my cozen Turner's where I staid and sat a while, and
carried The. and my wife to the Duke of York's house, to "Macbeth," and
myself to White Hall, to the Lords of the Treasury, about Tangier
business; and there was by at much merry discourse between them and my
Lord Anglesey, who  made sport of our new Treasurers, and called them his
deputys, and much of that kind.  And having done my own business, I away
back, and carried my cozen Turner and sister Dyke to a friend's house,
where they were to sup, in Lincoln's Inn Fields; and I to the Duke of
York's house and saw the last two acts, and so carried The. thither, and
so home with my wife, who read to me late, and so to supper and to bed.
This day The. Turner shewed me at the play my Lady Portman, who has grown
out of my knowledge.

16th.  Up, and to the office all the morning, dined at home with my
people, and so all the afternoon till night at the office busy, and so
home to supper and to bed.  This morning Creed, and in the afternoon comes
Povy, to advise with me about my answer to the Lords [Commissioners] of
Tangier, about the propositions for the Treasurership there, which I am
not much concerned for.  But the latter, talking of publick things, told
me, as Mr. Wren also did, that the Parliament is likely to meets again,
the King being frighted with what the Speaker hath put him in mind of--his
promise not to prorogue, but only to adjourne them.  They speak mighty
freely of the folly of the King in this foolish woman's business, of my
Lady Harvy.  Povy tells me that Sir W. Coventry was with the King alone,
an hour this day; and that my Lady Castlemayne is now in a higher command
over the King than ever--not as a mistress, for she scorns him, but as a
tyrant, to command him: and says that the Duchess of York and the Duke of
York are mighty great with her, which is a great interest to my Lord
Chancellor's' family; and that they do agree to hinder all they can the
proceedings of the Duke of Buckingham and Arlington: and so we are in the
old mad condition, or rather worse than any; no man knowing what the
French intend to do the next summer.

17th (Lord's day).  To church myself after seeing every thing fitted for
dinner, and so, after church, home, and thither comes Mrs. Batelier and
her two daughters to dinner to us; and W. Hewer and his mother, and Mr.
Spong.  We were very civilly merry, and Mrs. Batelier a very discreet
woman, but mighty fond in the stories she tells of her son Will.  After
dinner, Mr. Spong and I to my closet, there to try my instrument
Parallelogram, which do mighty well, to my full content; but only a little
stiff, as being new.  Thence, taking leave of my guests, he and I and W.
Hewer to White Hall, and there parting with Spong, a man that I mightily
love for his plainness and ingenuity, I into the Court, and there up and
down and spoke with my Lords Bellassis and Peterborough about the business
now in dispute, about my deputing a Treasurer to pay the garrison at
Tangier, which I would avoid, and not be accountable, and they will serve
me therein.  Here I met Hugh May, and he brings me to the knowledge of Sir
Henry Capell, a Member of Parliament, and brother of my Lord of Essex, who
hath a great value, it seems, for me; and they appoint a day to come and
dine with me, and see my books, and papers of the Office, which I shall be
glad to shew them, and have opportunity to satisfy them therein.  Here all
the discourse is, that now the King is of opinion to have the Parliament
called, notwithstanding his late resolutions for proroguing them; so
unstable are his councils, and those about him.  So staying late talking
in the Queen's side, I away, with W. Hewer home, and there to read and
talk with my wife, and so to bed.

18th.  Up by candlelight, and with W. Hewer walked to the Temple, and
thence took coach and to Sir William Coventry's, and there discoursed the
business of my Treasurer's place, at Tangier, wherein he consents to my
desire, and concurs therein, which I am glad of, that I may not be
accountable for a man so far off.  And so I to my Lord Sandwich's, and
there walk with him through the garden, to White Hall, where he tells me
what he had done about this Treasurer's place, and I perceive the whole
thing did proceed from him: that finding it would be best to have the
Governor have nothing to do with the pay of the garrison, he did propose
to the Duke of York alone that a pay-master should be there; and that
being desirous to do a courtesy to Sir Charles Harbord, and to prevent the
Duke of York's looking out for any body else, he did name him to the Duke
of York.  That when he come the other day to move this to the Board of
Tangier, the Duke of York, it seems, did readily reply, that it was fit to
have Mr. Pepys satisfied therein first, and that it was not good to make
places for persons.  This my Lord in great confidence tells me, that he do
take very ill from the Duke of York, though nobody knew the meaning of
these words but him; and that he did take no notice of them, but bit his
lip, being satisfied that the Duke of York's care of me was as desirable
to him, as it could be to have Sir Charles Harbord: and did seem
industrious to let me see that he was glad that the Duke of York and he
might come to contend who shall be the kindest to me, which I owned as his
great love, and so I hope and believe it is, though my Lord did go a
little too far in this business, to move it so far, without consulting me.
But I took no notice of that, but was glad to see this competition come
about, that my Lord Sandwich is apparently jealous of my thinking that the
Duke of York do mean me more kindness than him.  So we walked together,
and I took this occasion to invite him to dinner one day to my house, and
he readily appointed Friday next, which I shall be glad to have over to
his content, he having never yet eat a bit of my bread. Thence to the Duke
of York on the King's side, with our Treasurers of the Navy, to discourse
some business of the Navy, about the pay of the yards, and there I was
taken notice of, many Lords being there in the room, of the Duke of York's
conference with me; and so away, and meeting Mr. Sidney Montagu and
Sheres, a small invitation served their turn to carry them to London,
where I paid Sheres his L100, given him for his pains in drawing the plate
of Tangier fortifications, &c., and so home to my house to dinner, where I
had a pretty handsome sudden dinner, and all well pleased; and thence we
three and my wife to the Duke of York's playhouse, and there saw "The
Witts," a medley of things, but some similes mighty good, though ill
mixed; and thence with my wife to the Exchange and bought some things, and
so home, after I had been at White Hall, and there in the Queen's
withdrawing-room invited my Lord Peterborough to dine with me, with my
Lord Sandwich, who readily accepted it.  Thence back and took up my wife
at the 'Change, and so home.  This day at noon I went with my young
gentlemen (thereby to get a little time while W. Hewer went home to bid
them get a dinner ready) to the Pope's Head tavern, there to see the fine
painted room which Rogerson told me of, of his doing; but I do not like it
at all, though it be good for such a publick room.

19th.  Up, and at the office all the morning.  At noon eat a mouthful, and
so with my wife to Madam Turner's, and find her gone, but The. staid for
us; and so to the King's house, to see "Horace;" this the third day of its
acting--a silly tragedy; but Lacy hath made a farce of several
dances--between each act, one: but his words are but silly, and invention
not extraordinary, as to the dances; only some Dutchmen come out of the
mouth and tail of a Hamburgh sow.  Thence, not much pleased with the play,
set them at home in the Strand; and my wife and I home, and there to do a
little business at the Office, and so home to supper and to bed.

20th.  Up; and my wife, and I, and W. Hewer to White Hall, where she set
us down; and there I spoke with my Lord Peterborough, to tell him of the
day for his dining with me being altered by my Lord Sandwich from Friday
to Saturday next.  And thence heard at the Council-board the City, by
their single counsel Symson, and the company of Strangers Merchants, a
debate the business of water-baylage; a tax demanded upon all goods, by
the City, imported and exported: which these Merchants oppose, and
demanding leave to try the justice of the City's demand by a Quo Warranto,
which the City opposed, the Merchants did quite lay the City on their
backs with great triumph, the City's cause being apparently too weak: but
here I observed Mr. Gold, the merchant, to speak very well, and very
sharply, against the City.  Thence to my wife at Unthanke's, and with her
and W. Hewer to Hercules Pillars, calling to do two or three things by the
way, end there dined, and thence to the Duke of York's house, and saw
"Twelfth Night," as it is now revived; but, I think, one of the weakest
plays that ever I saw on the stage.  This afternoon, before the play, I
called with my wife at Dancre's, the great landscape-painter, by Mr.
Povy's advice; and have bespoke him to come to take measure of my
dining-room panels, and there I met with the pretty daughter of the
coalseller's, that lived in Cheapside, and now in Covent Garden, who hath
her picture drawn here, but very poorly; but she is a pretty woman, and
now, I perceive, married, a very pretty black woman. So, the play done, we
home, my wife letting fall some words of her observing my eyes to be
mightily employed in the playhouse, meaning upon women, which did vex me;
but, however, when we come home, we were good friends; and so to read, and
to supper, and so to bed.

21st. Up, and walked to the Temple, it being frosty, and there took coach,
my boy Tom with me, and so to White Hall to a Committee of Tangier, where
they met, and by and by and till twelve at noon upon business, among
others mine, where my desire about being eased of appointing and standing
accountable for a Treasurer there was well accepted, and they will think
of some other way.  This I was glad of, finding reason to doubt that I
might in this (since my Lord Sandwich made me understand what he had said
to the Duke of York herein) fear to offend either the Duke of York by
denying it, for he seemed on Sunday night last, when I first made known my
desire to him herein to be a little amused at it, though I knew not then
the reason, or else offend my Lord Sandwich by accepting it, or denying it
in a manner that might not forward his desire for Sir Charles Harbord, but
I thank God I did it to my great content without any offence, I think, to
either.  Thence in my own coach home, where I find Madam Turner, Dyke, and
The., and had a good dinner for them, and merry; and so carried them to
the Duke of York's house, all but Dyke, who went away on other business;
and there saw "The Tempest;" but it is but ill done by Gosnell, in lieu of
Moll Davis. Thence set them at home, and my wife and I to the 'Change, and
so home, where my wife mighty dogged, and I vexed to see it, being
mightily troubled, of late, at her being out of humour, for fear of her
discovering any new matter of offence against me, though I am conscious of
none; but do hate to be unquiet at home.  So, late up, silent, and not
supping, but hearing her utter some words of discontent to me with
silence, and so to bed, weeping to myself for grief, which she discerning,
come to bed, and mighty kind, and so with great joy on both sides to
sleep.

22nd.  Up, and with W. Hewer to White Hall, and there attended the Duke of
York, and thence to the Exchange, in the way calling at several places on
occasions relating to my feast to-morrow, on which my mind is now set; as
how to get a new looking-glass for my dining-room, and some pewter, and
good wine, against to-morrow; and so home, where I had the looking-glass
set up, cost me L6  7s. 6d.  And here at the 'Change I met with Mr.
Dancre, the famous landscape painter, with whom I was on Wednesday; and he
took measure of my panels in my dining-room, where, in the four, I intend
to have the four houses of the King, White Hall, Hampton Court, Greenwich,
and Windsor.  He gone, I to dinner with my people, and so to my office to
dispatch a little business, and then home to look after things against
to-morrow, and among other things was mightily pleased with the fellow
that come to lay the cloth, and fold the napkins, which I like so well, as
that I am resolved to give him 40s. to teach my wife to do it.  So to
supper, with much kindness between me and my wife, which, now-a-days, is
all my care, and so to bed.

23rd.  Up, and again to look after the setting things right against
dinner, which I did to very good content.  So to the office, where all the
morning till noon, when word brought me to the Board that my Lord Sandwich
was come; so I presently rose, leaving the Board ready to rise, and there
I found my Lord Sandwich, Peterborough, and Sir Charles Harbord; and
presently after them comes my Lord Hinchingbroke, Mr. Sidney, and Sir
William Godolphin.  And after greeting them, and some time spent in talk,
dinner was brought up, one dish after another, but a dish at a time, but
all so good; but, above all things, the variety of wines, and excellent of
their kind, I had for them, and all in so good order, that they were
mightily pleased, and myself full of content at it: and indeed it was, of
a dinner of about six or eight dishes, as noble as any man need to have, I
think; at least, all was done in the noblest manner that ever I had any,
and I have rarely seen in my life better anywhere else, even at the Court.
After dinner, my Lords to cards, and the rest of us sitting about them and
talking, and looking on my books and pictures, and my wife's drawings,
which they commend mightily; and mighty merry all day long, with exceeding
great content, and so till seven at night; and so took their leaves, it
being dark and foul weather.  Thus was this entertainment over, the best
of its kind, and the fullest of honour and content to me, that ever I had
in my life: and shall not easily have so good again.  The truth is, I have
some fear that I am more behind-hand in the world for these last two
years, since I have not, or for some time could not, look after my
accounts, which do a little allay my pleasure.  But I do trust in God I am
pretty well yet, and resolve, in a very little time, to look into my
accounts, and see how they stand.  So to my wife's chamber, and there
supped, and got her cut my hair and look my shirt, for I have itched
mightily these 6 or 7 days, and when all comes to all she finds that I am
lousy, having found in my head and body about twenty lice, little and
great, which I wonder at, being more than I have had I believe these 20
years.  I did think I might have got them from the little boy, but they
did presently look him, and found none.  So how they come I know not, but
presently did shift myself, and so shall be rid of them, and cut my hair
close to my head, and so with much content to bed.

24th (Lord's day).  An order brought me in bed, for the Principal Officers
to attend the King at my Lord Keeper's this afternoon, it being resolved
late the last night; and, by the warrant, I find my Lord Keeper did not
then know the cause of it, the messenger being ordered to call upon him,
to tell it him by the way, as he come to us.  So I up, and to my Office to
set down my Journall for yesterday, and so home, and with my wife to
Church, and then home, and to dinner, and after dinner out with my wife by
coach, to cozen Turner's, where she and The. gone to church, but I left my
wife with Mrs. Dyke and Joyce Norton, whom I have not seen till now since
their coming to town: she is become an old woman, and with as cunning a
look as ever, and thence I to White Hall, and there walked up and down
till the King and Duke of York were ready to go forth; and here I met
Will. Batelier, newly come post from France, his boots all dirty.  He
brought letters to the King, and I glad to see him, it having been
reported that he was drowned, for some days past, and then, he being gone,
I to talk with Tom Killigrew, who told me and others, talking about the
playhouse, that he is fain to keep a woman on purpose at 20s. a week to
satisfy 8 or 10 of the young men of his house, whom till he did so he
could never keep to their business, and now he do.  By and by the King
comes out, and so I took coach, and followed his coaches to my Lord
Keeper's, at Essex House, where I never was before, since I saw my old
Lord Essex lie in state when he was dead; a large, but ugly house.  Here
all the Officers of the Navy attended, and by and by were called in to the
King and Cabinet, where my Lord, who was ill, did lie upon the bed, as my
old Lord Treasurer, or Chancellor, heretofore used to; and the business
was to know in what time all the King's ships might be repaired, fit for
service.  The Surveyor answered, in two years, and not sooner. I did give
them hopes that, with supplies of money suitable, we might have them all
fit for sea some part of the summer after this.  Then they demanded in
what time we could set out forty ships.  It was answered, as they might be
chosen of the newest and most ready, we could, with money, get forty ready
against May.  The King seemed mighty full that we should have money to do
all that we desired, and satisfied that, without it, nothing could be
done: and so, without determining any thing, we were dismissed; and I
doubt all will end in some little fleete this year, and those of hired
merchant-men, which would indeed be cheaper to the King, and have many
conveniences attending it, more than to fit out the King's own; and this,
I perceive, is designed, springing from Sir W. Coventry's counsel; and the
King and most of the Lords, I perceive, full of it, to get the King's
fleete all at once in condition for service.  Thence I with Mr. Wren in
his coach to my cozen Turner's for discourse sake, and in our way he told
me how the business of the Parliament is wholly laid aside, it being
overruled now, that they shall not meet, but must be prorogued, upon this
argument chiefly, that all the differences between the two Houses, and
things on foot, that were matters of difference and discontent, may be
laid aside, and must begin again, if ever the House shall have a mind to
pursue them.  They must begin all anew.  Here he set me down, and I to my
cozen Turner, and stayed and talked a little; and so took my wife, and
home, and there to make her read, and then to supper, and to bed.  At
supper come W. Batelier and supped with us, and told us many pretty things
of France, and the greatness of the present King.

25th.  Up, and to the Committee of Tangier, where little done, and thence
I home by my own coach, and busy after dinner at my office all the
afternoon till late at night, that my eyes were tired.  So home, and my
wife shewed me many excellent prints of Nanteuil's and others, which W.
Batelier hath, at my desire, brought me out of France, of the King, and
Colbert, and others, most excellent, to my great content.  But he hath
also brought a great many gloves perfumed, of several sorts; but all too
big by half for her, and yet she will have two or three dozen of them,
which vexed me, and made me angry.  So she, at last, to please me, did
come to take what alone I thought fit, which pleased me.  So, after a
little supper, to bed, my eyes being very bad.

26th.  Up, and to the office, where busy sitting all the morning. Then to
the Office again, and then to White Hall, leaving my wife at Unthanke's;
and I to the Secretary's chamber, where I was, by particular order, this
day summoned to attend, as I find Sir D. Gawden also was. And here was the
King and the Cabinet met; and, being called in, among the rest I find my
Lord Privy Seale, whom I never before knew to be in so much play, as to be
of the Cabinet.  The business is, that the Algerines have broke the peace
with us, by taking some Spaniards and goods out of an English ship, which
had the Duke of York's pass, of which advice come this day; and the King
is resolved to stop Sir Thomas Allen's fleete from coming home till he
hath amends made him for this affront, and therefore sent for us to advise
about victuals to be sent to that fleete, and some more ships; wherein I
answered them to what they demanded of me, which was but some few mean
things; but I see that on all these occasions they seem to rely most upon
me.  And so, this being done, I took coach and took up my wife and
straight home, and there late at the office busy, and then home, and there
I find W. Batelier hath also sent the books which I made him bring me out
of France.  Among others, L'Estat, de France, Marnix, &c., to my great
content; and so I was well pleased with them, and shall take a time to
look them over: as also one or two printed musick-books of songs; but my
eyes are now too much out of tune to look upon them with any pleasure,
therefore to supper and to bed.

27th.  Up, and with Sir John Minnes in his coach to White Hall, where
first we waited on the Lords of the Treasury about finishing the
Victualling Contract; and there also I was put to it to make good our
letter complaining against my Lord Anglesey's failing us in the payment of
the moneys assigned us upon the Customs, where Mr. Fenn was, and I know
will tell my Lord; but it is no matter, I am over shy already, and
therefore must not fear.  Then we up to a Committee of the Council for the
Navy, about a business of Sir D. Gawden's relating to the Victualling, and
thence I by hackney to the Temple to the Auditor's man, and with him to a
tavern to meet with another under-auditor to advise about the clearing of
my Lord Bellasses' accounts without injuring myself and perplexing my
accounts, and so thence away to my cozen Turner's, where I find Roger
Pepys come last night to town, and here is his mistress, Mrs. Dickenson,
and by and by comes in Mr. Turner, a worthy, sober, serious man--I honour
him mightily.  And there we dined, having but an ordinary dinner; and so,
after dinner, she, and I, and Roger, and his mistress, to the Duke of
York's playhouse, and there saw "The Five Hours' Adventure," which hath
not been acted a good while before, but once, and is a most excellent
play, I must confess.  My wife and The. come after us, after they had been
to buy some things abroad, and so after the play done we to see them home,
and then home ourselves, and my wife to read to me, and so to supper and
to bed.

28th.  Up, and to the office, where all the afternoon, also after dinner,
and there late dispatching much business, and then home to supper with my
wife, and to get her to read to me, and here I did find that Mr. Sheres
hath, beyond his promise, not only got me a candlestick made me, after a
form he remembers to have seen in Spain, for keeping the light from one's
eyes, but hath got it done in silver very neat, and designs to give it me,
in thanks for my paying him his L100 in money, for his service at Tangier,
which was ordered him; but I do intend to force him to make me [pay] for
it.  But I yet, without his direction, cannot tell how it is to be made
use of.  So after a little reading to bed.

29th.  Up, and with W. Hewer in Colonel Middleton's coach to White Hall,
and there to the Duke of York, to attend him, where among other things I
did give a severe account of our proceedings, and what we found, in the
business of Sir W. Jenings's demand of Supernumeraries.  I thought it a
good occasion to make an example of him, for he is a proud, idle fellow;
and it did meet with the Duke of York's acceptance and well-liking; and he
did call him in, after I had done, and did not only give him a soft
rebuke, but condemns him to pay both their victuals and wages, or right
himself of the purser.  This I was glad of, and so were all the rest of
us, though I know I have made myself an immortal enemy by it.  Thence home
by hackney, calling Roger Pepys at the Temple gate in the bookseller's
shop, and to the Old Exchange, where I staid a little to invite my uncle
Wight, and so home, and there find my aunt Wight and her husband come
presently, and so to dinner; and after dinner Roger, and I, and my wife,
and aunt, to see Mr. Cole; but he nor his wife was within, but we looked
upon his picture of Cleopatra, which I went principally to see, being so
much commended by my wife and aunt; but I find it a base copy of a good
originall, that vexed me to hear so much commended. Thence to see Creed's
wife, and did so, and staid a while, where both of them within; and here I
met Mr. Bland, newly come from Gales [Cadiz] after his differences with
Norwood.  I think him a foolish, light-headed man; but certainly he hath
been abused in this matter by Colonel Norwood. Here Creed shewed me a copy
of some propositions, which Bland and others, in the name of the
Corporation of Tangier, did present to Norwood, for his opinion in, in
order to the King's service, which were drawn up very humbly, and were
really good things; but his answer to them was in the most shitten proud,
carping, insolent, and ironically-prophane stile, that ever I saw in my
life, so as I shall never think the place can do well, while he is there.
Here, after some talk, and Creed's telling us that he is upon taking the
next house to his present lodgings, which is next to that that my cozen
Tom Pepys once lived in, in Newport Street, in Covent Garden; and is in a
good place, and then, I suppose, he will keep his coach.  So, setting
Roger down at the Temple, who tells me that he is now concluded in all
matters with his widow, we home, and there hired my wife to make an end of
Boyle's Book of Formes, to-night and to-morrow; and so fell to read and
sup, and then to bed.  This day, Mr. Ned Pickering brought his lady to see
my wife, in acknowledgment of a little present of oranges and olives,
which I sent her, for his kindness to me in the buying of my horses, which
was very civil.  She is old, but hath, I believe, been a pretty comely
woman:

30th.  Lay long in bed, it being a fast-day for the murder of the late
King; and so up and to church, where Dr. Hicks made a dull sermon; and so
home, and there I find W. Batelier and Balty, and they dined with us, and
I spent all the afternoon with my wife and W. Batelier talking, and then
making them read, and particularly made an end of Mr. Boyle's Book of
Formes, which I am glad to have over, and then fell to read a French
discourse, which he hath brought over with him for me, to invite the
people of France to apply themselves to Navigation, which it do very well,
and is certainly their interest, and what will undo us in a few years, if
the King of France goes on to fit up his Navy, and encrease it and his
trade, as he hath begun.  At night to supper, and after supper, and W.
Batelier gone, my wife begun another book I lately bought, called "The
State of England," which promises well, and is worth reading, and so after
a while to bed.

31st (Lord's day).  Lay long talking with pleasure, and so up and I to
church, and there did hear the Doctor that is lately turned Divine, I have
forgot his name, I met him a while since at Sir D. Gawden's at dinner, Dr.
Waterhouse!  He preaches in a devout manner of way, not elegant nor very
persuasive, but seems to mean well, and that he would preach holily; and
was mighty passionate against people that make a scoff of religion.  And,
the truth is, I did observe Mrs. Hollworthy smile often, and many others
of the parish, who, I perceive, have known him, and were in mighty
expectation of hearing him preach, but could not forbear smiling, and she
particularly upon me, and I on her.  So home to dinner: and before dinner
to my Office, to set down my journal for this week, and then home to
dinner; and after dinner to get my wife and boy, one after another, to
read to me: and so spent the afternoon and the evening, and so after
supper to bed.  And thus endeth this month, with many different days of
sadness and mirth, from differences between me and my wife, from her
remembrance of my late unkindness to her with Willet, she not being able
to forget it, but now and then hath her passionate remembrance of it as
often as prompted to it by any occasion; but this night we are at present
very kind.  And so ends this month.

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Dine with them, at my cozen Roger's mistress's
     Dutchmen come out of the mouth and tail of a Hamburgh sow
     Fain to keep a woman on purpose at 20s. a week
     Find it a base copy of a good originall, that vexed me
     Found in my head and body about twenty lice, little and great
     I have itched mightily these 6 or 7 days
     I know I have made myself an immortal enemy by it
     Lady Castlemayne is now in a higher command over the King
     Mighty fond in the stories she tells of her son Will
     Observing my eyes to be mightily employed in the playhouse
     Proud, carping, insolent, and ironically-prophane stile
     She finds that I am lousy
     Unquiet which her ripping up of old faults will give me
     Up, and with W. Hewer, my guard, to White Hall
     Weeping to myself for grief, which she discerning, come to bed






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, January 1668/69
by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***

***** This file should be named 4196.txt or 4196.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/9/4196/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
