The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is Going On
In It, Vol. 1, No. 15, February 18, 1897, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Great Round World and What Is Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 15, February 18, 1897
       A Weekly Magazine for Boys and Girls

Author: Various

Release Date: March 11, 2005 [EBook #15325]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD AND ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team (www.pgdp.net).









[Illustration: THE GREAT ROUND WORLD AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT.]


TO THE SUBSCRIBERS OF "CURRENT EVENTS":

I take pleasure in announcing that I have purchased the entire
subscription list and good will of _Current Events_, and offer you in its
stead THE GREAT ROUND WORLD, a weekly newspaper for boys and
girls.

You will receive one number of THE GREAT ROUND WORLD for each
number of _Current Events_ due you on your subscription. I make the
special offer, to send you THE GREAT ROUND WORLD every week until
December 31st, 1897, if you will remit the sum of $1.25 at once.

My regular subscription price is $2.50.

If there is any special feature or department of _Current Events_ which
the majority of the subscribers would like to have continued, I will take
great pleasure in arranging for it, and I trust that you may find THE
GREAT ROUND WORLD a satisfactory substitute for _Current Events_.

    WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON.

[Illustration: Rear Tenements, New York City]

[Illustration: THE GREAT ROUND WORLD AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT]

    VOL. 1       FEBRUARY 18, 1897.       NO. 15

There is a new cause for supposing that the Treaty with Great Britain will
either be defeated in the Senate, or else delayed for some time to come.

This new trouble concerns the building of the Nicaragua Canal.

It seems a remote cause, does it not? but it only shows how closely the
affairs of one nation are bound up with those of all the others. No matter
what our speech, our climate, or our color, we are all a portion of the
great human family, and the good of one is the good of all.

The Nicaragua Canal is a water-way that will cross the narrow neck of land
that makes Central America. It will connect the Atlantic Ocean with the
Pacific Ocean.

With the help of such a canal, ships in going to the western coast of
North or South America will not need to make the long and dangerous voyage
around Cape Horn.

Cape Horn, you will see if you look on your map, is the extreme southerly
point of South America.

=Copyrighted 1897, By WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON.=

There are so many storms and fogs there, that the Horn, as it is called,
is much dreaded by sailors.

Since the invention of steam, all the steamships go through the Straits of
Magellan, and save the passage round the Horn; but there is not enough
wind for sailing vessels in the rocky and narrow straits, so they still
have to take the outside passage.

The Straits of Magellan divide the main continent of South America from a
group of islands, called Tierra del Fuego, and Cape Horn is the most
southerly point of this archipelago.

The journey down the coast of South America on the east, and up again on
the west, takes such a long time, that the desire for a canal across the
narrow neck of land which joins North and South America has been in men's
minds for many years.

A railway was built across the Isthmus of Panama to shorten the distance,
and save taking the passage round the Horn. Travellers left their ship at
one side of the Isthmus, and took the train over to the other, where they
went on board another ship, which would take them the rest of their
journey.

This plan greatly increased the expense of the journey, and the canal was
still so much wanted, that at last the Panama Canal was begun.

You have all heard about the Panama Canal, which was to do the same work
that the Nicaragua Canal is to do, that is, to connect the Atlantic and
Pacific Oceans. You have probably heard how much time, labor, and human
life was wasted over it, and how much trouble its failure caused in
France.

This Canal was to cut across the Isthmus at its very narrowest point. It
was worked on for years, every one believing that it would be opened to
ships before very long. Many of the maps and geographies that were printed
in the eighties said that the Panama Canal would be opened in 1888, or at
latest in 1889.

No one expected what afterward happened. In 1889 the works were stopped
for want of money; the affairs of the Canal were looked into; it was found
that there had been dishonesty and fraud, and in 1892 the great Count
Ferdinand de Lesseps, who built the Suez Canal, and a number of other
prominent Frenchmen, were arrested for dealing dishonestly with the money
subscribed for the Canal.

There was a dreadful scandal; many of the high French officials had to
give up their positions, and run away for fear of arrest.

When the whole matter was understood, it was found that, for months before
the work was stopped, the men who had charge of the Canal had decided that
the work would cost such an enormous sum of money that it would be almost
an impossibility to complete it.

They did not have the honesty to let this be known, but allowed people to
go on subscribing money, a part of which they put in their own pockets,
and spent the rest in bribing the French newspapers not to tell the truth
about the Canal.

The worst of it was, that the money which had been subscribed was not from
rich people, who would feel its loss very little, but from poor people,
who put their savings, and the money they were storing away for their old
age, into the Canal; and when they lost it, it meant misery and poverty to
them.

So the Panama Canal failed.

But the project of making a canal was not given up. Two years before the
idea of digging at Panama had been thought of, the ground where the
Nicaragua Canal is being built had been surveyed, and thought better
suited to the purpose than Panama.

The reason for this was, that at Panama a long and deep cut had to be made
through the mountains. This had to be done by blasting, in much the same
way that the rocks are cleared away to build houses. This is a long and
tedious work.

The Nicaragua Canal will be 159 miles long, while the Panama, if it is
ever completed, will be only 59 miles; but of these 159 miles, 117 are
through the Nicaragua Lake and the San Juan River--water-ways already made
by nature. For the remaining distance, there are other river-beds that
will be used, and only 21 miles will actually have to be cut through.

The main objection to this route for the Canal is, that there is a volcano
on an island in the Nicaragua Lake, and there are always fears of
eruptions and earthquakes in the neighborhood of volcanoes. A great
eruption of the volcano might change the course of a river, or alter the
face of the country so much, that the Canal might have to be largely
remade.

The building of this Canal will cost hundreds of millions of dollars--two
hundred millions, it is said.

Nicaragua is not a rich-enough country to be able to pay for this, and it
is here that the subject touches the closest interests of other countries,
and is serious enough to overthrow a much-desired treaty.

If the Canal is to be built, it must be built by a country rich enough to
pay for it.

The country which builds the Canal will have the right to collect a toll
from every vessel passing through, and also to defend it, and prevent the
ships of an enemy from using it.

The United States is naturally anxious to be the country that controls the
Canal. But England does not appear to want us to have entire control.

England owns the greater part of the Suez Canal, which joins the
Mediterranean Sea and the Red Sea. This Canal, you will see by looking at
the map, makes a short cut to Asia, and saves ships the long journey round
Africa and the Cape of Good Hope.

England finds this Canal very useful; it makes a great deal of money for
her, and she would like to have just as large a share of the Nicaragua
Canal That is at least what the Senators say.

When the Treaty was mentioned in the Senate, Senator Morgan at once
demanded that his Nicaragua Canal Bill should be acted upon.

His bill provides that the United States Government shall furnish the
money for the Canal, and in return shall own nearly the whole of it, and
have the right to say who shall have charge of its affairs.

No sooner had his request been made in the Senate, than a protest came
from Mr. Rodriguez, the Minister for the Greater Republic of South
America, who was received by President Cleveland a week or two ago.

He said that Nicaragua would not consent to any such arrangement, and
would not allow the United States to have so much control of the Canal. He
added that if Senator Morgan's bill were passed, Nicaragua would not allow
the building of the Canal to go on without entirely new arrangements.

The Senators are very angry about this. They think that Nicaragua has
been told to say this by England, to prevent the matter of the Canal being
settled before the Arbitration Treaty is made with England.

They say if the Treaty is accepted in its present form, and ratified
before the Nicaragua Canal Bill is passed, England will have the right to
take a hand in the Canal question.

An interest in the Nicaragua Canal would give England a right to use both
the short water-ways of the world, and, with her great navy, it would give
her rights that might be very dangerous to us.

The excitement about the Canal has taken away all hope of the Treaty being
acted upon by Congress this session. When it does come up, the Senators
intend to have it so worded that the Nicaraguan affairs cannot be
interfered with by England.

The idea of the Treaty seemed a splendid thing for us, and all lovers of
peace will grieve if some satisfactory understanding is not arrived at;
but we must not neglect our own best interests.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is a good deal being said about King Oscar of Sweden and Norway
being chosen as the umpire, in case the members of the Arbitration
Committee are unable to agree.

Many people are saying that King Oscar would not make a fair umpire, and
that he would lean to the side of England in every matter that came up.

A treaty was made in Stockholm, in 1855, between Sweden and Norway, and
France and England, which they say binds King Oscar to agree with England.

This treaty said that the King of Sweden agreed not to sell to Russia, or
allow her to use, any portion of his kingdom; and that if Russia made any
offers for land, the King of Sweden was to tell England and France at
once.

England and France, in return for this, promised to help Sweden with men
and ships in case of any trouble with Russia.

This treaty is not binding any longer. France has put it aside, and has
made friends with Russia on her own account. It would not be possible for
her to keep to her agreement if she wished to.

The old agreement being broken, England and Sweden will have to make a new
one, to bind them together again.

Nothing has been heard of such a treaty, so it is to be supposed that none
exists.

In this case, there is no reason why Oscar of Sweden should not be the
umpire chosen.

It would, of course, be more agreeable to us if the umpire were not a
European ruler. England would be sure to object to an American umpire, and
neither Asia nor Africa could give us a person capable of filling the
office, so it looks very much as though the only person to be found, who
understands diplomacy well enough to be of use, would be a European
sovereign.

If the umpire must be such a person, King Oscar of Sweden is the most
desirable of them all.

He is, besides, almost the only European ruler who is free to accept the
office.

The royal families of Germany, Russia, Denmark, and Greece are all related
to England, and therefore could not be chosen. Austria and Italy are too
hemmed in by other countries, and too much bound by treaties, to be free
to give any decision that might offend Europe.

Sweden and Norway are cut off from the rest of Europe by the Baltic Sea,
and for this reason have not needed to burden themselves with as many ties
as the other powers of the Continent.

King Oscar is moreover a quiet, sensible man, who would be likely to help
the Committee to arrive at wise and just conclusions.

There is another advantage in choosing King Oscar. The royal family of
Sweden is only eighty years old, and has not those centuries of traditions
behind it, which make other royal houses so difficult to deal with.

Oscar II., the present King, is the grandson of the famous French Marshal,
Bernadotte, for whom Napoleon secured the throne of Sweden and Norway.

He is a man who loves learning, and encourages clever people, and is very
simple in his ways.

His eldest son, Prince Oscar, wished to marry one of the ladies of his
mother's household, Lady Ebba Munck, but she was not a person of
sufficient rank to marry the heir to a throne.

A prince, you know, cannot marry any one he chooses. There are very strict
laws about this, and the marriage of a prince is not considered a marriage
at all, unless his wife is of royal blood.

King Oscar told his son that the marriage was impossible, but when Prince
Oscar said he would rather give up his right to the throne than the lady
he loved, King Oscar permitted him to do so, and made a special decree,
allowing the marriage of his son with Lady Ebba.

King Oscar could have prevented this if he had chosen, and it must have
caused him much pain to have his eldest son give up his right to the
throne, and to know that, if he and all his other sons died, neither
Prince Oscar nor any of his sons could ever come to the throne because of
this marriage. But he loved his son better than his pride, and so Prince
Oscar married Lady Ebba, and Prince Carl will be King of Sweden and Norway
when his father dies.

Oscar of Sweden did a most kind and amiable thing for some of our
countrymen last year.

A party of Americans were travelling in Norway, and two of them, Mr. and
Mrs. Youmans, of New York, were drowned in one of the lakes. They were
driving, and the horses becoming frightened, backed over the bank into the
water.

Both Mr. and Mrs. Youmans were much respected and loved, their goodness
and charity were unbounded, and much sorrow was felt when the news of
their dreadful end was cabled to this country.

King Oscar not only expressed his sorrow for the accident, but ordered
that a marble monument should be placed on the spot where they had met
their death.

During the twenty-seven years that Oscar has been on the throne, his
country has been peaceful and prosperous.

       *       *       *       *       *

From Cuba, the news comes that another gunboat has been captured.

The story of the capture is that the boat, the _Cometa_, had been sent to
a certain post on the coast to prevent the landing of any filibustering
parties.

The Cubans found that the vessel anchored at night, at a spot from which
she could easily be attacked from the shore.

[Illustration: Attack on Spanish Gunboat.]

One night they opened fire on the vessel, struck her in several places,
and damaged her. During the confusion on the ship, several boat-loads of
Cubans put off from the shore and boarded the _Cometa_.

A terrible fight took place. The commander and half the sailors were
killed, and the rest surrendered. The Cubans then burned the vessel.

This news comes from the Cuban side.

The Spaniards deny that any such fight took place, and the Admiral of the
fleet declares that he will have the _Cometa_ come into Havana harbor,
with all her flags flying, to show that she has not been burned.

It is so difficult to get at the truth of these reports.

The news of General Weyler is, that he has left Havana once more, and is
marching through the western end of the island, to convince himself, and
the authorities in Spain, that the rebellion is over, and the island has
been pacified.

He declares that he has not met a single Cuban in all his marches, that
there are no insurgents round Havana, and that sugar-grinding will be
begun very shortly.

This is what General Weyler says of himself.

The Cubans, on their side, say that it is true that Weyler never sees any
of the rebels, for the simple reason that he knows perfectly well where
they are, and carefully avoids going anywhere near them.

They had a great plot laid to make him aware of their presence.

They prepared an ambush for him--which means that they set a trap for him.
Weyler was walking into it, and in a few minutes would have been
surrounded by the Cubans, who had planned to take him prisoner, when
unfortunately one of the Cuban guns went off. The Spaniards were instantly
warned that they were in danger, made a hasty retreat, and the Cubans lost
their prize.

The Cubans are in strong force round Havana; they are further than ever
from being pacified; the rebellion is by no means over, and Weyler's
telegrams are not deceiving any one any more.

The General is not in favor in Spain, his reports are no longer believed,
and he will most likely be ordered home before long, and some one else be
sent to Cuba in his stead.

Spain is in a very unhappy state at present. The people are angry at
having spent so much money, and wasted so many lives, over the wars in
Cuba and the Philippine Islands, without arriving at any result, and they
are blaming the Government for not trying to bring about peace.

It is more than likely that a change in the government will soon take
place.

The present Government is very angry with Weyler, because it has come to
light that many of the marches he has cabled about to Spain have not been
made at all. He has taken the train wherever he could, and if he has seen
no bands of insurgents from the car windows he has telegraphed that peace
was restored, and no more rebels were to be found in the province.

The latest news of all is, that the Spanish Government in Madrid is
preparing a paper which will be sent to Cuba very shortly. It offers the
Cubans Home Rule, and gives them a great many rights that they do not now
possess.

While the Cubans are pleased at this, they have not much faith in the
offer, and say that unless the United States promises to see that Spain
carries out her promises, they will not consider the offer at all.

The principal Cubans are waiting to see the actual paper before they say
much about it.

In the mean while, many of the Spanish soldiers are deserting from their
own ranks, and going over to the Cuban side.

The Spaniards have been offering every inducement to get the Cubans to
desert, and go over to them, but hardly any have done so--the only person
of importance being the infamous Dr. Zertuccha, who betrayed Maceo.

A telegram from Havana says that a major in the Spanish army, with 100 men
and 50,000 rounds of ammunition, joined General Gomez the other day. At
Puerto Principe, a Spanish colonel, with a whole company of well-armed
men, also went over to the Cubans.

The Cubans think this is a very favorable sign for them, and look for a
speedy end to the war.

       *       *       *       *       *

The filibustering steamers _Three Friends_ and _Dauntless_ have been
released.

Their owners have had to promise to give them up again whenever they are
wanted. They have also had to give the court some money, which they will
lose if the ships are not brought back when the court calls for them.

If the cases of piracy and filibustering against them are found to be
true, the ships will become the property of the Government, and the owners
will lose them altogether.

The United States cruiser _Montgomery_ has been ordered to Key West, to
prevent filibustering parties going over to Cuba, and the _Raleigh_, which
has been doing this duty, has gone to be repaired.

       *       *       *       *       *

People who are interested in the comfort of the poor of New York are very
glad to know that some dreadful rear tenement houses in Mott Street are to
be taken away by order of the Board of Health.

We all read about tenement houses, and we all feel sorry that many of the
houses for the poor to live in are not as comfortably built as they might
be.

Very few of us know the discomforts that the poor have to endure, who are
obliged to live in the old, badly planned tenement-houses.

Poor people must live near their work, because they cannot afford to pay
car-fares back and forth every day. So the tenement-houses are generally
built in neighborhoods where the work is being done, and people have to
take them clean or dirty, well or badly built, because they must make
their home in that neighborhood.

In some of the older and poorer tenements, many families live on the same
floor; they are crowded together in the most dreadful manner, and instead
of having plenty of light, air, and water to help make them endurable,
they have little or none of any of these necessary things.

In these houses the want of water is one of the greatest evils. Instead of
giving each tenement a nice sink, and a water-boiler at the back of the
stove, so that people can have hot and cold water all the time, there is
no water put into any of the rooms.

Outside on the landing there is water, and a rough sink, which the tenants
of each floor use in common. They have to go into the hall to fetch every
drop of water they use, and this is the only place they have to empty the
dirty water away.

In some houses the sinks are not on every floor, and in these, the poor
women have to drag their heavy buckets of water up and down the stairs.

The tenements are not heated. Each tenant has to keep his own rooms warm.

Every drop of warm water they need for cooking or washing has first to be
boiled over the stove, and so the poor are forced to use a great deal more
coal than more well-to-do people need.

It is not because they don't pay the landlords enough rent that the poor
have no comforts in their homes. So many families can be packed into one
floor, that landlords find tenement-houses pay them extremely well.

Many of the tenement-houses have been allowed to get so dilapidated, that
the Board of Health has taken the matter in hand, and has been trying to
make the landlord have them properly drained, and cleaned, and repaired.

It came to the knowledge of this board that there were some rear tenements
in Mott Street, which were in a frightful condition.

They had been built at the back of some houses fronting on Mott
Street--in fact, they had been put in the little spot of ground that had
been the yard belonging to the front houses.

They came up so close to the front buildings that, by stretching out your
arms, you could almost touch the front wall of one house and the back wall
of the other. The actual distance apart was a little over seven feet.

This would have been bad enough, but worse was to come. After a time,
warehouses were built over the surrounding back yards, and at last these
poor tenements had brick walls round their sides and backs, to within
eight inches of the windows, and all the light they got was given them by
the seven-foot court that divided them from the houses in front.

Just imagine the darkness and the stuffiness of these rooms. Think how
awful they must have been in the summer, with not a breath of air reaching
them from any quarter. The tenants were obliged to go up to the roof and
sleep there, for the rooms were unbearable.

The people who lived on the lower floors paid less rent than those on the
top, because when you got up to the top floor there was a faint glimmer of
daylight.

The tenants were put to the expense of burning lights all day long,
because neither sun nor light could reach them.

When the Board of Health found out about these horrible places, and
learned that little children were being born and brought up in them, an
order was at once given that the rear tenements should be torn down.

But the owner objected. He tried to pretend that his houses were fit for
people to live in, and went to law to prevent the Board of Health from
interfering.

This was last September. Ever since then the matter has been in the courts
before the judge.

People have still been living in these awful dens, getting sick, and
losing their children, and spending more money for doctors and medicine
than would have paid their car-fare to healthier and more comfortable
homes.

The court has at last decided that these rear tenements are dangerous and
unhealthy, and the Board of Health will have them pulled down in a very
short time.

Many of our wealthy people wish so sincerely that poor people should have
more comforts, that they are spending their money in building beautiful
model tenement-houses, which will give the tenants every possible comfort
for the same amount of money that they now have to pay for the dark,
wretched places they live in.

One gentleman, Mr. D.O. Mills, felt so sorry for the men who had no homes,
and were obliged to take board in these wretched tenements, that he is
building a model lodging-house for them.

This house is down-town, where the men need it. It is large enough for
1,500 men to sleep in, and for each to have a comfortable room to himself.

The house is to be heated throughout, and there are to be elevators to
take the men upstairs. The arrangements for washing and bathing are
splendid, there is any amount of hot and cold water, and a laundry, with
all the newest arrangements for washing and drying clothes quickly, where
the men can go and wash their own clothes, and have them clean for the
morning.

There are also comfortable rooms, where the men can read and write and
play games. All the books and papers and games will be ready for them in
the rooms, for it is Mr. Mills' wish to make the lodging-house a home to
the men, so they may find their amusement at home, and not be tempted to
go to saloons.

All they are to be charged is twenty cents a night. For this they will
have all the comfort, warmth, and cleanliness that a man could wish for.

There is to be a restaurant in the house, where the lodgers can buy their
meals. Their food will not be given them for the twenty cents, but it will
be made as cheap as possible, and will be of the best kind, and cooked in
the nicest way.

It is to be hoped Mr. Mills' experiment will be such a success, that many
others will follow his example. This lodging-house is on Bleecker Street,
and work is already commenced on it.

       *       *       *       *       *

A sailor who has just come back from Japan brings word that sixteen
American sailors are in prison in Siberia for trying to kill Russian
seals, and carry away their fur to market.

The story the man tells is that in October, 1895, the American schooner
_Saitans_ was cruising in the Okhotsk Sea, off the Siberian coast. Some of
the men landed on an island, and while they were ashore a heavy gale
sprang up, and, to save herself, the _Saitans_ put out to sea, leaving the
men behind.

They remained where they were for five days, and then they were found by a
Russian man-of-war. They were accused of trying to catch seals, and were
sent to prison for five months.

The following May, one of the United States cruisers went to the port
where the men were imprisoned, and the officers saw them.

The men begged the officers to do something for them, because they had
been told that when their five months' imprisonment was over, they were to
be arrested again, and sent back to prison once more.

The officers asked the police about this, and were told that it was all
nonsense; the five months would be up in a few weeks, and the men set at
liberty. The officers were satisfied that this was the truth, and went
away.

But when the five months were up, the sailors found that their fears were
only too well grounded. They were rearrested, and sent back to prison for
eighteen months.

The sailor who brings this news says that, when he reached the port where
the men are imprisoned, he managed to be taken to see them, and found them
working on some Russian fortifications.

He says the men were very unhappy, and had almost lost their courage.
Their second sentence will not be over till October, and they are afraid
that they will be rearrested, and imprisoned once more, unless something
is done for them.

They declare that it was not their fault that they were on the island.
They insist that they were doing no harm, and their vessel put back to sea
and left them in their unhappy position.

    G.H.R.




INVENTION AND DISCOVERY.


A New York newspaper has been making some experiments in signalling ships
at night, which, if as successful as it is claimed to be, will be of the
greatest service to sailors for all time to come.

Ships have a regular way of talking to one another, by means of flags
arranged in certain ways.

This form of signalling is comprehended by all sailors. It is a universal
language, and no matter from what country or in what seas ships may be
sailing, the language of the flags makes it possible for them to be
understood.

There has been one difficulty with the flag-signals, and that has been
that they were useless at night. When it became too dark for the flags to
be seen, sailors had no other means of communication.

The New York paper claims to have overcome this difficulty.

In saying that ships have no means of communicating with each other, it
must not be forgotten that they can use lights and send certain messages
with them. But the flag system enables them to say exactly what they wish
to, while through the lights they can only show where they are, and call
for help in case of accident.

The invention of the searchlight set men thinking, and at last the idea
struck one man that if the searchlight were turned on the flags, it ought
to be perfectly possible to see them in the darkest night.

A few nights ago two tugs went down to Sandy Hook to try if the experiment
would work. To their great delight they found it did answer perfectly.
The tugs were stationed about a mile and a half apart, and could read with
ease the messages waved across the water.

More experiments will be made, and if on further trial the method is found
to be practical, a great advance will have been made in navigation.

From Amsterdam, another report comes of a method that has been invented,
to enable ships to speak directly with the shore at a distance of five
miles.

This invention is in the nature of a powerful foghorn. It is, however,
made somewhat like a musical instrument, so that different tones can be
produced by it; and the idea is to have these tones arranged into a
signalling code, after the fashion of the flag-signals, so that a
conversation can be kept up in a similar way to that done with flags.
G.H.R.




LETTERS FROM OUR YOUNG FRIENDS.


We have had a very large and interesting mail this week from the young
friends of THE GREAT ROUND WORLD.

We take pleasure in acknowledging and publishing R.R.'s graphic and clever
description of the fire near Wanamaker's in Philadelphia, Helen Z.C.'s
pleasant chat about a Chicago suburb, and Seymour U.P.'s nice little note
from Saranac Lake.

We also acknowledge the receipt of relief maps for the competition from
Adrian Van A. and Harriot M., of Brooklyn.

    DEAR EDITOR:

    I have just arrived home from school. I wish to tell you of the
    very large fire down-town. I go to school about one block from
    where the fire was. The fire started in a grocery store
    belonging to Hanson Brothers, about 7:30 o'clock. This grocery
    is No. 1317 Market Street. From there the fire spread to an
    umbrella store, which had the numbers 1309 to 1313 Market
    Street. From there a spark set fire to Wanamaker's store; it
    started there in the large clock tower, which soon after was a
    mass of flames. It fell with a loud crash soon after. The fire
    spread to the woodwork of the City Hall, where it was soon put
    out.

    Wishing your magazine years of success, I am
                             Your reader,         R.R.

    PHILA., Jan. 25th., 1897.


    DEAR EDITOR:

    I like THE GREAT ROUND WORLD very much, and anticipate
    their coming.

    I receive them from my auntie of New York City. She reads them
    first, and then sends them to me.

    They are very enjoyable, and as I am just in the interesting
    part of school, they help me very much. Perhaps you would like
    to know where Maywood is. It is a suburb of Chicago.

    A very pretty place, and so much nicer than living in the city,
    because here we have fresh air and green grass.

    Would you not rather live in the country?

    We have a park here which is kept in order by the town
    authorities. This winter they have flooded it, and made a very
    nice skating pond, which is free to all.

    So after school hours we boys and girls have a bonny time.

    Hoping to receive an answer, I remain,
                     Yours affectionately,     HELEN Z.C.

    P.S.--These "Sylvia's Caramels" you speak of in No. 3 are what
    we call "Fudges."

    They are _very_ nice. We make them often.

    MAYWOOD, ILL., Jan. 25th, 1897.


    TO THE EDITOR OF THE GREAT ROUND WORLD:

    I am an enthusiastic reader of your most interesting little
    paper, and would like you to send me a "Who? When? and What?"
    chart.

    I am up in the mountains for the winter, and there is fine
    skating and tobogganing here, and I have also a fine big snow
    house. We belong to the "Pontiac Club," and can therefore skate
    whenever we want. Wishing your paper much success. I remain

                        Your fond reader, SEYMOUR U.P.

    SARANAC LAKE, N.Y., Jan. 22d, 1897.


In reply to questions from Miss Lena Penn:

George du Maurier died in London, October 8, 1896, of heart disease.

There is a statue of Hans Christian Andersen in the market-place of
Copenhagen. He was the author of the famous Fairy Tales which have given
so much pleasure to so many millions of children.

If there are any statistics of the population of the earth since Adam, we
are unaware of them.

The population of the earth, estimated in 1891, was 1,487,900,000.

At the death of the Emperor Augustus, the population of the earth was
estimated at 54,000,000.

    DEAR MR. EDITOR:

    My father receives your little paper, THE GREAT ROUND
    WORLD, every week. I like it real well, and all the rest of
    the people and children I have let take one of the copies liked
    it so well I let them take more copies. I think it a very nice
    little paper, and wish you success. I send you the following
    extract, taken from "Wit and Wisdom," showing that the X-rays
    are not a recent discovery altogether.

                                         THOMAS C. SCOTT.
    BINGHAMTON, N.Y., Jan. 25th., 1897.

    "Dr. Milio, the celebrated surgeon of Kieff, while on a visit to
    St. Petersburg, explained the means he had invented for
    illuminating the body by means of the electric light to such an
    extent that the human machine may be observed almost as if skin
    and flesh were transparent. The Moscow _Gazette_ asserts that to
    demonstrate the feasibility of his process, Dr. Milio placed a
    bullet inside his mouth, and then lighted up his face, upon
    which the bullet became distinctly visible through his cheek.
    Dr. Milio did not propose to lay bare all the secrets of the
    flesh, to explore the recesses of the heart, or to perform any
    miracles, physical or metaphysical. But he claimed to have
    discovered a new and effective way of dealing with gun-shot
    wounds: first, by means of electric illumination, he discovered
    the precise situation of the bullet; next, by means of
    magnetism, he proposed to extract the bullet, provided always
    that the bullet contained some portion of steel. Against leaden
    bullets his system is powerless, and he therefore intended to
    represent to the International Committee, which met at Geneva,
    the desirability of recommending an admixture of steel in the
    manufacture of all future bullets. Dr. Milio's experiments with
    bullets containing only a slight admixture of steel are said to
    have been thoroughly successful."


DEAR THOMAS:

Your letter is very interesting.

It has long been known that it is possible to see through matter if we
only knew just how. The X-ray has shown us the way.

    THE EDITOR.


    TO THE EDITOR OF THE GREAT ROUND WORLD:

    In your edition of Jan. 21st, 1897, you wrote of the swallowing
    up by the sea of Robinson Crusoe's Island, or the island of Juan
    Fernandez. Now I have always heard this island called "Robinson
    Crusoe's Island," and I think the reason is, that Alexander
    Selkirk was cast away there, and on his adventures the story of
    Robinson Crusoe was written by Daniel Defoe. But I have read
    "Robinson Crusoe," and the island as described by him cannot be
    the Island of Juan Fernandez, but must be one of the Windward
    Islands in the Caribbean Sea, off the mouth of the great Orinoco
    River in South America, and I think is the Island of Tobago;
    this best fits the careful description of Daniel Defoe.

    In Crusoe's first exploration of the island he says:

    "I came in view of the sea to the west, and it being a very
    clear day, I fairly descried land,... extending from the W. to
    the W.S.W.... It could not be less than fifteen or twenty
    leagues off."

    There is no land situated W.S.W. from Juan Fernandez. W.S.W.
    from the island of Tobago lies the great island of Trinidad.
    When Crusoe attempts to sail around the island he says:

    "I perceived a strong and most furious current."

    This could be no other than the current from the mouth of the
    great Orinoco River.

    But what settles the matter is that after Crusoe had taught
    Friday to speak English, he had a conversation with him, in
    which Crusoe asks Friday:

    "How far it was from our island to the shore, and whether the
    canoes were not often lost. He told me there was no danger; no
    canoes ever lost; but after a little way out to sea, there was a
    current and wind always one way in the morning, the other in the
    afternoon. This I understood to be no more than the sets of the
    tide, as going out or coming in; but I afterward understood it
    was occasioned by the great draft and reflux of the mighty river
    Oroonoko, in the mouth of which river, as I thought afterwards,
    our island lay; and that this land which I perceived to the
    W.S.W. was the great island Trinidad."

    I like your GREAT ROUND WORLD, Mr. Editor, but I like
    Robinson Crusoe, too. I like to know just where he was cast
    away, and hope if I am right you will tell other boys who read
    "Robinson Crusoe" the true place, where Daniel Defoe describes
    poor Crusoe as living all those weary years.

                                                    EDGAR B.
    Aged twelve years.
    CHICAGO, ILL.

MY DEAR YOUNG FRIEND:

After the very careful work you have done on Robinson Crusoe, and the
evident affection you have for him, it seems a shame to have to tell you
that no such person as Crusoe existed.

As we told in THE GREAT ROUND WORLD, No. 11, a Scotchman named
Alexander Selkirk was put ashore on the island of Juan Fernandez, and
lived there four years and four months.

When he was rescued and brought back to England, he wrote an account of
his life there.

An English writer named Daniel Defoe saw this book of Selkirk's, and
thought it would make a wonderful story if it was well handled. Selkirk's
was a mere statement of what had happened to him, and while intensely
interesting, was not written to amuse people.

Defoe created an imaginary person, whom he called Robinson Crusoe, dressed
up Selkirk's facts to suit the purpose of his story, and wrote the
wonderful and undying story of Robinson Crusoe.

His geographical facts, no doubt, were purposely altered from Selkirk's,
and were made as graphic as possible, in order to add the semblance of
truth to his story. In the early years of the seventeenth century
geography was very little understood. The connection between Selkirk's
sufferings on Juan Fernandez, and the adventures of Robinson Crusoe have
always been so thoroughly understood that, as you read in your GREAT
ROUND WORLD, the island of Juan Fernandez has been called Crusoe's
Island, and Selkirk's cave and hut, Crusoe's. THE EDITOR.


    EDITOR GREAT ROUND WORLD.

    DEAR SIR:--Your article on salting streets has greatly
    roused your subscriber, my small son.

    Will you kindly tell him, through your magazine, _how_ the
    children may help abate the terrible cruelty? What _action_ do
    you suggest for them? He has interested a number of lads in the
    subject, but does not know how to put forth effort--when the
    discovery is made that the law is violated.

    Complain to party giving offence, to police, or what?

    Your magazine is warmly appreciated in this household by old and
    young, and we hope for its continued prosperity.

                     Very truly,
                         D.K. LIPPINCOTT'S MOTHER.
    194 FAIRMOUNT AVENUE, NEWARK, N.J.


DEAR MASTER LIPPINCOTT:

I am delighted that you and your little friends are interested in the
matter of salting the streets, and that you are eager to put a stop to
such cruelty.

In the first place, you can help by telling every one about it, and by
getting people, old and young, interested. Do you know that not one person
to whom I have spoken about it--aside from Dr. Johnson, the people at the
A.S.P.C.A., and Mr. Harison--knew anything about it? Strange, was it not?
A good many things are permitted because people do not know just how
dreadful they are.

As to the method of learning just where salt has been used, I know only
the one of which the article tells you, and that is: if there is snow or
ice in other places, and the tracks are covered with water, then you may
know that there is a reason for it. And inasmuch as the water would be
twenty degrees below freezing, I believe that you could determine the
presence of salt by means of the mercury. If you had a thermometer which
would register that number of degrees, and were to plunge it into the
slush, the sensitive mercury would tell the story.

As to the person to whom you should complain: at any of the offices of the
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. The New York Society is
at 10 East 22d Street, and there are branches or agents of the Society in
nearly every town of importance.

    Yours sincerely,
           IZORA C. CHANDLER.




BOOK REVIEWS.


The editor is pleased to acknowledge the following clever account of Nora
Perry's "A Flock of Boys and Girls," published by Little, Brown & Co.,
Boston.

    TO THE EDITOR OF THE GREAT ROUND WORLD:

    If any one wants to read an interesting book, I will tell you
    one of Nora Perry's books, called "A Flock of Girls and Boys."
    It is a collection of short stories, and tells of the scrapes
    they got into and how they got out of them, and it has the
    language boys and girls use every day. There is one story that I
    was especially impressed with: the name of it is "Major Molly's
    Christmas Promise." It was about a little girl who made a
    promise to a little Indian girl; and she kept her promise; and
    in doing that, although she did not know it, saved her mother's
    and father's life, besides her friends having to go to war.

    MADELEINE H.P.




SIMPLE LESSONS IN THE

STUDY OF NATURE

By I.G. OAKLEY


This is a handy little book, which many a teacher who is looking for means
to offer children genuine nature study may be thankful to get hold of.

Nature lessons, to be entitled to that name, must deal with what can be
handled and scrutinized at leisure by the child, pulled apart, and even
wasted. This can be done with the objects discussed in this book; they are
under the feet of childhood--grass, feathers, a fallen leaf, a budding
twig, or twisted shell; these things cannot be far out of the way, even
within the stony limits of a city.

Nor are the lessons haphazard dashes at the nearest living thing; on the
contrary, they are virtually fundamental, whether with respect to their
relation to some of the classified sciences, or with reference to the
development of thought and power of expression in the child himself.

The illustrations are few, and scarcely more than figures; it is not meant
to be a pretty picture-book, yet is most clearly and beautifully printed
and arranged, for its material is to be that out of which pictures are
made. It will be found full of suggestions of practical value to teachers
who are carrying the miscellaneous work of ungraded schools, and who have
the unspeakable privilege of dealing with their pupils untrammelled by
cast-iron methods and account-keeping examination records.

=_Sample copy, 50 Cents, post-paid_=

       *       *       *       *       *

    =WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON
    3 & 5 W. 18th St. ... New York City=





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is
Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 15, February 18, 1897, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD AND ***

***** This file should be named 15325.txt or 15325.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/5/3/2/15325/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team (www.pgdp.net).


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
