The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is Going On
In It, Vol. 1, No. 30, June 3, 1897, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Great Round World and What Is Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 30, June 3, 1897
       A Weekly Magazine for Boys and Girls

Author: Various

Release Date: April 14, 2005 [EBook #15619]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD AND ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.(www.pgdp.net)






_FIVE CENTS._

THE GREAT ROUND WORLD
AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT

  Vol. 1                JUNE 3, 1897                No. 30.
[Entered at Post Office, New York City, as second class matter]

[Illustration: A
WEEKLY
NEWSPAPER
FOR
BOYS AND
GIRLS]

Subscription
$2.50 per year
$1.25 6 months


    WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON. PUBLISHER
    NO. 3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST. NEW YORK CITY

=Copyright, 1897, by WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON.=

       *       *       *       *       *

Which Is Your Favorite

_BICYCLE_

You have your choice of any wheel in the market if you send us one hundred
regular subscriptions to the

"Great Round World"

Show the paper to your friends, and you will soon find one hundred people
who will be glad to subscribe. Send the subscriptions in to us as fast as
received, and when the one hundredth, reaches us you can go to ANY dealer
YOU choose, buy ANY wheel YOU choose, and we will pay the bill.

Six-months' subscriptions will be counted as one-half, three-months' as
one-quarter,

_SAMPLE COPIES WILL BE FURNISHED AT HALF PRICE. (SEE OTHER OFFERS)_

Great Round World
3 and 5 West 18th Street, New York City


       *       *       *       *       *

  A Good Agent
    Wanted
  In Every Town
              for
    "The Great Round World"

       *       *       *       *       *

=LIBRARIANS=

will please note that the subscription price of THE GREAT ROUND WORLD--to
libraries--is $1.75 per year.

       *       *       *       *       *

=S.T.A. Vertical Writing Pens=

[Illustration]

=PRICES:=

=Per Gross, $1.00; Per Dozen= (samples), =10 Cents=

Vertical writing demands a commercial pen. The "S.T.A." pens are strictly
a commercial pen, made after the famous models designed by John Jackson,
originator of the

    ------_System of Upright Writing._------

The desirability of teaching children, boys especially, to write with such
a pen as they will use in after life will be recognized by every good
teacher.

_Introduced into the Schools of Denver, Colo., and elsewhere._


       *       *       *       *       *

=THE . FIRST . BOUND . VOLUME=

OF

="The Great Round World"=

(Containing Nos. 1 to 15)

IS NOW READY.

    Handsomely bound in strong cloth, with title on side and back.
    Price, postage paid, $1.25. Subscribers may exchange their
    numbers by sending them to us (express paid) with 35 cents to
    cover cost of binding, and 10 cents for return carriage. Address

=_3 and 5 West 18th Street,- - - -New York City._=

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE GREAT ROUND
WORLD
AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT.]

    VOL. 1   JUNE 15, 1897.   NO. 30


A great deal of interest is being taken in the affairs of Cuba at this
time.

So many reports reached President McKinley of the sufferings of many of
our citizens who are living in Cuba, that he felt it his duty to look
into the matter, and he has sent a message to Congress on the subject.

The cause of the new trouble is this.

Some months ago General Weyler, thinking that the country people
supplied the insurgents with food and gave them shelter, issued an order
that all the inhabitants of Cuba who lived in the country districts
should leave their homes, and within eight days present themselves at
the nearest town, there to remain until the war was over.

In obedience to this order the country people were forced into the
towns, the soldiers destroyed the dwellings from which they had been
driven, and lands that had once been green and fertile were turned into
barren wastes, without house, home, or shelter upon them.

In the history of modern warfare no such cruel scheme has ever before
been devised.

The unfortunate country people, thus torn from their homes, were
allotted lands, within the fortified line of the towns, to encamp on.
They were given neither food nor shelter, but were driven into the towns
and left to shift for themselves.

Most of these people were farmers, living in comfortable circumstances.
By the order of General Weyler they were reduced to beggary.

Not only has Weyler made no attempt to feed these unhappy people, but he
has forbidden them to go in search of food for themselves. Even when
they assured the Spanish soldiers that they had crops ripening in their
fields which would be more than sufficient to relieve their sufferings,
they were forbidden to go out and gather them, and were forced to stay
in idleness and starve.

The distress is something fearful. The people in the cities endeavor to
help their suffering neighbors, but gradually their own supply of
provisions has run out, until starvation stares them also in the face.
There is hardly a town in the western end of Cuba to-day where the
people are not dying in hundreds from hunger.

Among the people who have been driven into the towns are between six
hundred and eight hundred Americans. The distress of these persons, whom
his oath of office binds him to protect, having been brought to the
knowledge of the President, he has determined to take some action to
relieve it.

In his message to Congress he asked that $50,000 be appropriated as a
Relief Fund for the Americans in Cuba.

This may be but the first step toward a much more important action; but
our President seems to be a very cautious man, and one who likes to be
very sure of his ground before he takes a step.

For the present he is determined not to quarrel with Spain, and has
arranged matters so that the attempt of the United States to aid her
citizens shall be made with the full approval of Spain.

He has asked Senor Dupuy de Lome, the Spanish Minister, if his
Government would have any objection to our sending supplies to our
fellow-countrymen.

The Spanish Minister has very graciously replied that Spain will not
oppose the plan, but will do all in her power to help the United States
to carry it out.

The Minister was kind enough to add that Spain will distribute the
supplies for us, if we wish it. He stated that he fears that, unless the
American supplies are handled by the Spanish authorities, they may fall
into the hands of the insurgents, and hinder General Weyler in the
carrying out of his plan to force the rebels into submission.

This offer will not be accepted.

If the appropriation is made, Congress will order the supplies to be
distributed by the American Consuls, who are well able to tell the
difference between armed insurgents and starving women and children.

When the President's message reached the Senate, a resolution was at
once passed that the sum asked for be appropriated.

In the House of Representatives the request was not so quickly granted.

Some of the Congressmen met the demand with a plea that the resolution
for the appropriation be added to the Morgan Bill for recognizing the
belligerency of Cuba, and that the two matters be discussed and voted
on at the same time.

This did not please the majority of the members, and the House adjourned
without a vote being taken about the Relief Fund.

This does not mean that the House is unwilling to help the Americans in
Cuba, but that the friends of Cuba see in it a chance to push the Morgan
Bill forward, and are trying to make the best they can of the
opportunity.

Whatever the fate of the Morgan Bill, there will be a day or two of
delay in passing the resolution for the Relief Fund, but it will be
passed without doubt.

Some progress has, however, been made with the Morgan Bill.

Three members of the Committee on Foreign Relations waited on the
President, and asked him if he had received any fresh news about the
state of affairs in Cuba.

The President sent them to the State Department, with permission to read
all the official documents about Cuba that were on file.

It is stated on good authority that these papers showed such a state of
intense suffering and distress, that when the Senators reported to their
Committee the things they had seen and read in the State papers, several
of the members declared that they would no longer oppose the Morgan
Bill.

The Bill was discussed in the Senate after the appropriation had been
granted, but no decision was arrived at.

Should it pass, the first benefit the Cubans will gain from it will be
that Spain will have to treat the people she captures as prisoners of
war, or else be prepared to quarrel with the United States over the
matter.

At the present time she is able to declare that every prisoner she makes
is a rebel, and to shoot her captives down like dogs, without trial. The
soldiers are in the habit of seizing boys and old men, most of them
innocent of any crime whatever, and marching them to prison as rebels.

In most of the military towns, it is stated that at dawn every morning
one or more of these captives are led out and shot in the public square
as an example to the rest of the people.

To venture outside the lines in search of food is a crime for which many
Cubans have forfeited their lives.

The President is not unaware of these horrors, but he is determined to
be sure that he knows the truth of the matter before he takes any
decisive action.

He has sent Mr. Calhoun to Cuba to investigate the cause of the death of
Dr. Ricardo Ruiz, who died or was killed in the prison of Guanabacoa, as
we told you in THE GREAT ROUND WORLD, NO. 19.

While he is in the island on this business, Mr. Calhoun is also to make
notes of the general condition of things, and the President will be
guided in his future Cuban policy by the report Mr. Calhoun makes.

There is a very grave reason why it is necessary for the President to
take some action on Cuba at this moment. Diseases of the most serious
kind have broken out in Cuba, and it is feared that they may be carried
into our own country, unless some steps are taken to prevent them.

As we have said, no attempt has been made to protect, feed, or house the
people who have been brought into the towns; and the overcrowding and
hunger and misery have produced every form of fever and sickness, from
which these poor unfortunates are dying in great numbers.

The best way to prevent the spreading of these diseases is to stop the
causes that give rise to them. It may therefore be necessary, for the
protection of this country, that the President take some steps to put an
end to the struggle in Cuba.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is as yet no settlement of the trouble between Greece and Turkey.

When the Greeks decided to put their affairs in the hands of Europe, the
Powers sent to Turkey, asking her on what terms she would make peace,
and if she would grant an armistice while the matter was being
discussed.

An armistice means that both sides agree to cease fighting for a certain
time which has been agreed upon between them.

After the delay of a week, during which the Turks kept pressing forward
into Greece and gaining all the advantages they could, the Sultan sent
his reply.

He simply stated his terms, and added that he would grant no armistice
until they were accepted.

Instead of demanding $15,000,000 and certain points in Thessaly, as it
was supposed he would do, he said that he must have $50,000,000 for his
war expenses, and the whole of Thessaly.

The dismay in Europe over the reply of the Sultan would have been comic,
if the poor Greeks had not been suffering so severely from the muddle
the Powers had made of the whole business.

The Powers supposed that Turkey would he willing to listen to them, and
stop the war just as soon as they asked her to.

Acting on this belief, they made Greece give up certain advantages which
she had regained in Epirus, and made her withdraw her troops, promising
that Turkey should not advance any farther, if Greece would obey their
wishes.

Greece obeyed, only to find that the Powers had made promises which they
could not perform.

Turkey has become intoxicated with her success, and may no longer allow
the Powers to influence her.

The Turks have taken Dhomokos, the last stronghold of the Greeks, who
fell back on this city after the retreat from Pharsala. It is feared
that the Moslems will advance to the very gates of Athens, unless
something is done to prevent them. What this something shall be, the
Powers are at a loss to state.

Backed by the approval of Germany, the modern Turks are no longer the
despised nation they have been for so long. It has been the custom to
speak of the Sultan as the "Unspeakable Turk" and "The Sick Man of
Europe," whom the Powers were keeping alive until they had quite decided
how to divide his possessions.

Turkey's success in Greece has changed all this.

Every one knew that the Turks could fight well, but it was the custom to
treat them contemptuously, and say that after all they were "only
Turks." The short war with Greece has put an end to this feeling for
good and all. The Turks have proved themselves a powerful nation. They
have won back their own self-respect, and have forced Europe to take a
more respectful attitude toward them.

They have surprised the world with their bravery and their fine
generalship; and there is beginning to be a good deal of fear lest this
despised nation shall rise in its newly-found might, and dictate to
Europe.

The Turks, despite their victory, are still the same shifty, cruel,
unpleasant people; and the Powers must feel a good deal ashamed that the
only result of their diplomacy has been to put fresh power into the
hands of people who are a blot on the face of Europe, and who would much
better have been driven back into Asia among peoples who are more in
sympathy with their savagery and semi-barbarism.

But the Powers have now to deal gently with the Turk.

They have sent another message to the Sultan, demanding that hostilities
cease while the terms of peace are being discussed. No reply was made to
the Sultan's note, but the message stated that Europe would not allow
Greece to be crushed.

It is said that if the Sultan persists in asking the unreasonable terms
he does, and will not grant the armistice unless they are accepted,
Europe will declare war upon him.

There may be another week of waiting before the Sultan sends any reply
to this letter.

The Sultan is anxious to gain time, because every advantage he can gain
in Greece makes his price for peace just that much higher. He has a plan
of his own for gaining time, which is extremely annoying to Europeans.
It is this. In the Mohammedan religion there are a great number of
fasts and feasts. The Sultan, who till now has not been noted for his
piety, has suddenly become the most religious of persons.

When he receives a letter from the Powers that he wants to keep a few
days before he answers it, he sends them a most gracious note, saying
that it is the feast of so-and-so, and it is contrary to his religion to
attend to business during the days appointed for the festival.

By this manoeuvre he manages to keep his army fighting and winning
battles, while Europe is helplessly waiting for his answer. After the
Powers had asked for an armistice he used this pretext to delay
answering for a whole week.

The European diplomats, who are made the victims of the Sultan's
devotion to fasts and feasts, wonder why he allows his army to continue
the business of war during these times if he is really so pious as he
pretends to be.

       *       *       *       *       *

A report has just been spread that Russia has frightened the Sultan into
ceasing hostilities until the terms of peace can be arranged.

It is to be hoped that this is true.

       *       *       *       *       *

The mining district of Kootenay in British Columbia is the scene of much
agitation at this moment.

Kootenay lies on the border of British Columbia, where it joins the
States of Montana, Idaho, and Washington.

In this region there are extensive gold mines, many of which are worked
and owned by Americans, who have been very successful, and made the
mines pay exceedingly well.

To their surprise and annoyance, the Legislature of British Columbia
passed a law the other day, making it impossible for Americans to take
up any claims, unless they give up their American citizenship and become
British subjects.

It is said that numbers of Americans who have crossed the borders from
Idaho and Montana are deprived of their finds by this law, and there is
a great deal of excitement and indignation over it.

The Government of British Columbia says that the law was passed as a
rebuke to Americans, because the United States Government has been
making laws which are hurtful to Canadians.

Some of the American mine-owners became so alarmed that they took out
their naturalization papers. Others determined to defy the law, and
commenced hostilities by sending the ore they got from their mines over
the border into Washington, to be smelted.

This took a good deal of business and money out of the hands of the
Canadians, and there was an outbreak of indignation over it.

There promises to be a good deal of trouble before the matter is
settled.

The Canadians will allow no American workmen to be employed on the
Public Works, nor can they hold any good positions in the towns.

The Americans profess not to mind this in the least, declaring that the
Canadians are welcome to manage their towns as they please, if they will
only let the Americans in the mines alone.

This law against Americans does not, however, meet with the approval of
the Canadian Parliament, the Legislature which passed it being only the
local one of British Columbia.

Many of the Canadian mine-owners are as annoyed over the matter as the
Americans are. They say that the citizens are helping to open up their
country, and that it will be a bad thing for British Columbia if the
Legislature makes it impossible for Americans to remain there.

The chances are that the Parliament will take the matter in hand and
straighten it out. We can but hope that it will do so, for Americans and
Canadians have so many ways in which they can be helpful to one another,
that it will be a pity if they become estranged.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Elverton R. Chapman has gone to Washington to serve his sentence of
thirty days in jail; and Mr. Havemeyer is also in that city, awaiting
his trial.

Efforts were made by Mr. Chapman's friends to obtain a pardon for him,
and a petition was circulated among the Senators, begging the President
to release him. No action was taken, however, because Mr. Chapman did
not personally ask for the pardon; so he has gone to jail. When he has
served his sentence he will still have a fine of $100 to pay before he
can be freed.

The Senate Committee which Mr. Chapman offended must not be mistaken for
the Lexow Committee which held its sessions a few months ago.

Mr. Chapman's breach of the law took place in 1894. In that year the
United States Senate held a Sugar Trust Investigation.

The committee in charge of the investigation asked Mr. Chapman to give
the names of some of the Senators who were said to have been speculating
in sugar stock.

Mr. Chapman refused to answer, and was arrested and tried for contempt
of the Senate. He was found guilty and sentenced to thirty days in jail
and a fine of $100.

For three years Mr. Chapman has been fighting this decision, on the
ground that the question was not a proper one to ask, and that he had
been right in refusing to answer it.

The result of the various appeals in this case has been watched for with
the greatest interest.

The final decision has upheld the dignity of the Senate, and shown the
people that a Senate committee is not to be trifled with.

The Senate itself was a little ruffled over the matter.

When it was proposed that the President should be asked to pardon Mr.
Chapman, Senator Allen, of Nebraska, introduced a resolution that before
the President should be applied to for pardon, Mr. Chapman must appear
before the Senate, and purge himself of his contempt by answering the
questions that he had refused to answer three years ago.

Mr. Chapman would probably have still persisted in his refusal, and got
himself into fresh trouble; so it was perhaps a good thing for him that
he did not personally apply for a pardon.

Mr. Havemeyer's lawyers are busy over his case. They intend to say in
his defence that the questions asked him had nothing to do with the
matter in hand, and that he also was right in refusing to answer them.

In the mean time Mr. Havemeyer is using his personal influence to
persuade the Senators not to prosecute him and to let his case be
withdrawn when the day appointed to try it comes round.

It is more than likely, however, that Mr. Havemeyer and Mr. Searles will
both have to share Mr. Chapman's fate, and pay the penalty of their
contempt of the Senate.

       *       *       *       *       *

The log of the _Mayflower_ is now safely in this country.

It was brought over by Mr. Bayard, the former Ambassador to England, who
arrived here a day or two ago.

When the Bishop of London handed the manuscript to Mr. Bayard, he told
him that an application had been made by Mr. Hay, the new Ambassador,
for the log to be turned over to him, as Mr. Bayard was now no longer
the Ambassador of the United States.

The persons who had the log in charge decided that Mr. Bayard was the
proper person to carry the manuscript to Boston, as all arrangements had
been made with him, and so Mr. Hay's request was denied.

Before the manuscript was given to Mr. Bayard, a clerk read the
conditions of the transfer of the "log." These, among other things,
provided that certified copies should be furnished to any persons
wishing to have them.

When Mr. Bayard arrived in this country, he was asked how the English
had felt about the killing of the Arbitration Treaty.

He said that they were greatly disappointed, and that there was
universal regret in England that it had been rejected.

       *       *       *       *       *

It would seem that we have too much money in New York.

Mr. Jordan, the Assistant Treasurer, has just been to Washington to see
Secretary Gage on various important matters, and among other things to
call attention to the condition of the vaults in the Sub-Treasury.

It has been known for some time that the walls of these vaults have been
forced out of plumb by the immense weight of the sacks of silver dollars
stacked against them.

When the time for counting the money came round, it was found that the
walls were so insecure that there was danger of their giving way and
crushing some of the clerks under the weight of the money-bags.

The count had to be stopped, and the bags, which contained millions of
dollars, piled up in the corridors, while a steel frame was put in, that
would be strong enough to keep all this money in safety.

The fact of there being millions of dollars in the Treasury does not
mean that such a tremendous sum of money is lying idle, while thousands
are in want of it.

Practically, every dollar of the money in the Treasury is in circulation
in the shape of the paper bills which we use as money.

These bills have no value in themselves; they are just so much printed
paper, and if we tried to sell them for the value of the paper they are
made of, we would get about ten cents for a pound of them.

The reason why they are of value to us, and we can exchange them for the
amount printed on their faces, is that for every one of these notes that
is issued, the Government deposits as many dollars in the Treasury as it
represents.

If you look on the face of the last issue of dollar bills, you will see
printed across it:

"This certifies that there has been deposited in the Treasury of the
United States one silver dollar, payable to the bearer on demand.

  "G. Fount Tillman, Register of the Treasury.
"D.N. Morgan, Treasurer of the United States."

The bills that we use are really silver certificates, which give us the
right to go to the nearest Treasury and demand as many silver dollars as
we have notes for, whenever we are minded to do so.

The millions of dollars that are lying in the Sub-Treasury in New York
represent, therefore, millions of dollars in bills, or silver
certificates, that are in use and for which the Treasurer must be able
to give solid money at any time he is asked.

A country becomes bankrupt when it cannot redeem its paper money in
coin.

That is the condition of Spain and Cuba at this moment.

In Cuba General Weyler has ordered a large amount of paper money issued.
The banks have been obliged to obey him; but as every one knows that no
coin has been deposited in the Treasury to make the paper notes good,
people do not care to take them.

General Weyler says that Spain will make the notes good at the end of
the war; but as no one believes him, the paper money has steadily fallen
in value.

Falling in value, you must understand, means that the merchant will not
give a dollar's worth of goods in exchange for a dollar note.

In Cuba the merchants began by giving but ninety cents' worth of goods
for the dollar; but as the war has continued and the poverty of Spain
has become plainer, they have given less and less, until now they will
only give thirty cents' worth of goods in exchange for the paper dollar.

During the late war in the South, the Confederates issued paper money,
which they promised to redeem as soon as the war was over, but for which
they had no coin to deposit.

Toward the close of the war, when the Southern cause had become
hopeless, and the people feared the paper money might never be redeemed,
$150 Confederate money often had to be paid to get a pair of shoes
soled, and twenty-five to fifty paper dollars were demanded in exchange
for a loaf of bread.

Of course the United States did not redeem this money when the war was
over, the promise to redeem it having been made by the Confederate
States; and so the thousands of dollars of Confederate money did not
really have any value.

Those who had grumbled at paying such large sums to get their boots
soled got the best of the bargain, for they had something to show for
their money, while those who held the bills had really nothing but a
handful of waste paper.

No coin had been deposited in the Treasury for the bills that were
issued, and so they had no value whatever.

You can see how very necessary it is that we should have vaults bulging
with money if our business is to go on satisfactorily.

       *       *       *       *       *

The school-ship _St. Mary's_ has just started off for her summer cruise.

This school-ship is kept by the City of New York for the purpose of
teaching boys how to become sailors.

The vessel is under the control of the Board of Education, and only boys
of the best character are received on board.

If by chance a bad boy finds his way on to the _St. Mary's_, he is
dismissed the moment his evil ways show themselves.

The youths who are admitted to the school must be between the ages of
sixteen and twenty, and they must show a very decided taste for a
sailor's life.

The course of instruction takes two years, and during that time each boy
must pay $30 for the cost of his uniform and bedding.

In the winter the ship lies alongside the pier at the foot of
Twenty-eighth Street and East River, and there the boys are taught the
art of navigation and all the seamanship they can learn before they go
to sea.

As soon as the spring sets in, the _St. Mary's_ is towed over to a
suitable harbor in Long Island, and there the boys are thoroughly
drilled in the furling and unfurling of sails, and in all the practical
knowledge that will enable them to handle the ship when she puts to
sea.

When all is ready, she starts off on a cruise which lasts till Fall, and
returns to her pier in October.

Arrived in dock, the graduation exercises are held; and the graduates
are assigned to such ships of the merchant navy as are in need of them.

This year there are eighty-nine scholars on board the _St. Mary's_. It
is the intention of Lieutenant-Commander Reeder, who is in command of
the vessel, to sail across the Atlantic to Fayal, Lisbon, Gibraltar, and
Madeira, before he brings his ship back to winter quarters.

It is said that the young sailors who are turned out of this nautical
school are in great demand, and have no difficulty in finding good
berths as soon as they have graduated.

       *       *       *       *       *

A new torpedo-boat, the _Holland_, has just been launched at
Elizabethport, N.J.

There has been a good deal of mystery all winter about the building of
this boat.

Some said she was being built for Cuba; others that Spain had bought
her.

No one was allowed to enter the yard where she was building, and the
strictest secrecy was kept as to her make and shape.

At last she has been completed and launched, but the inventor, Mr.
Holland, refuses to allow any one to look at his boat until he is quite
satisfied that she is perfect.

He claims for her that she can be navigated as well under water as above
it, and that she will ride on the surface of the waters, or plunge
beneath them, at the will of her master.

The _Holland_ is a gunboat, and will be armed with three kinds of guns:
one to fire on the surface of the water, a submarine gun to use under
the water, and torpedo tubes.

In attacking a vessel, the _Holland_ is intended to fire her
surface-guns, and as soon as she has done such damage as she can with
them, to sink down under the water. She is then to make for the enemy's
vessel with her best speed, and when within a short distance of the foe,
is to rise to the surface to take aim; and then, sinking again, to
discharge her torpedoes.

As soon as this is done, she is to steam under the vessel, and fire her
submarine gun into the unfortunate ship, which it is expected she will
blow to pieces.

The _Holland_ is to be tried in New York Harbor; then, as soon as her
inventor is satisfied, a public exhibition will be given of her powers.

If she can accomplish what is claimed for her, she is at once the most
wonderful and the deadliest invention of modern times.

Two or three of the foreign governments are watching the _Holland_ with
much interest. Mr. Holland is not known to have made any arrangements
about selling her, or the patent under which she is built.

It is to be hoped that when he is finally ready to dispose of her, the
United States may be fortunate enough to become her purchaser.

If we have two or three such vessels as the _Holland_ cruising near our
harbors, it will simplify the problem of coast-defence very
considerably.

       *       *       *       *       *

On page 317, Vol. I., of THE GREAT ROUND WORLD, we spoke of the
explorer who was trying to reach the North Pole in a balloon.

This gentleman, Professor Andree, had his balloon in readiness for the
attempt last year.

He waited from the 23d of June till the middle of August for a favorable
wind to bear him northward.

While his party was still waiting, Dr. Nansen returned from his famous
expedition, in which he reached a point within two hundred miles of the
Pole.

After a few more days, it was decided that it was too late in the year
to attempt the aerial voyage, and so Mr. Andree had to postpone the
attempt.

Not at all discouraged by his failure, he stated that he would try again
the next year, and has spent the past winter making preparations for a
fresh venture.

The balloon will be filled and ready for the start about the middle of
June, when Mr. Andree and his companions will once more make the
attempt.

The Russian Geographical Society has printed hundreds of circulars to be
distributed among the natives of the lands lying around the pole,
showing them by the aid of pictures what kind of an object a balloon is,
and urging them to tell the nearest authorities if they see it. They are
also requested, if the balloon should descend, to treat the men who are
in it with the greatest kindness.

Mr. Andree is full of hope for his scheme, and expects to reach the
pole. He will be spared the long journeys over the ice-fields, which all
Arctic explorers have found to be the hardest part of their work.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Sixth Convention of the Universal Postal Union is being held in
Washington this month. Delegates from all over the world are here to
attend it.

The Postal Union is a union of governments to regulate the postal
business between nations.

As the correspondence of the world grew larger, and the improved means
of travelling made it possible for men to journey to all parts of the
earth, great trouble was found in the handling of the mail matter.

The rates for carrying letters varied for each country, and infinite
work and delay was caused by the calculation made necessary thereby.

At last a few of the countries most interested in the matter formulated
a Universal Postal Union, which established a fixed rate for letters
sent to all countries in the Union.

This plan was first suggested at Berne, in Switzerland, in 1874.

The countries agreeing to abide by this rule styled themselves the
Universal Postal Union, and made many useful laws for the transmission
of mail matter.

It was the hope when the Association was started that every country in
the world would join it.

In 1894 the hope was so nearly realized that all countries excepting
parts of Asia and Africa had become members of the Union.

It is expected that China and Corea will ask for admission at the
present meeting in Washington, and then, to quote the words of
Postmaster-General Gary in opening the Congress:

"When these two countries shall have joined us, the sun in its daily
circuit will not rise on a civilized people which is not included in the
Postal Union."

Many subjects will be discussed during the session of the Congress. One
of the most important will be that of having a Universal Postage Stamp.
Stamp collectors won't like the idea, because there will only be one
kind of stamp in use between all countries; it will, however, be a great
benefit to people in foreign countries who would like to prepay the
answers to their letters.

New York has decided to make some important changes in her mail service.

These changes have not been suggested by the Postal Congress; but if
they were only in working order, they would give some of the delegates
much to talk about when they return to their own countries.

The changes to be made are in the line of hastening the despatch and
delivery of letters.

This is to be accomplished by means of a network of pneumatic tubes,
which will be laid under the streets.

When a letter is posted at any of the sub-stations, instead of lying in
the box until, the postman comes round to collect it, it will be
instantly sent through the tube and deposited on the cancelling desk at
the nearest station.

By this means a great deal of time will be saved; it is even said, by
the persons interested in the scheme, that a letter which now takes two
hours to go from Wall Street to the Grand Central Depot, can be sent by
the pneumatic tubes in less than ten minutes.

The Government has given out the contract for laying the tubes, and one
circuit is to be in working order by October.

It is said that the big dry-goods stores mean to make arrangements
whereby they can send their small parcels by tube instead of messenger,
and save a good deal of money now spent for horses and drivers.

The Pneumatic Postal system is in use in London, Berlin, and
Philadelphia, and has proved a great success wherever tried.

                                            GENIE H. ROSENFELD.

       *       *       *       *       *




BOOK REVIEWS.


We have received a new history of Victoria, written for children; this
has been sent to one of our readers, and an account will appear soon.
The book is published by Frederick Warne & Co.

We have also received from Ginn & Co., Boston, a copy of the "Finch
Primer." This is another one of those bright little books for our small
brothers and sisters; it has colored illustrations, and is very
attractive.

"Every reader of this page knows Mrs. Julia Truitt Bishop, of New
Orleans, whose stories have given them rare pleasure for the past seven
or eight years. But they do not know that Mrs. Bishop is the 'Dallas,'
whose delightful sketches of animal life have attracted so much
attention. Newspaper articles are necessarily somewhat ephemeral, except
to those that are wise enough to cut them out and give them long life in
a scrap-book; but Mrs. Bishop's animal stories are so true to nature, so
real, so full of the kindly feeling that dwells deep down in an animal
lover's heart, that we are glad to see them in the more durable form of
a little hook.

"She has collected most of those that have been published here, and
William Beverley Harison, of New York, has brought them out in a series
of neat pamphlets, under the title of 'The Great Round World Natural
History Stories.' These sketches need no commendation from us; you know
what they are, for you have felt their gentle influence in inculcating a
love for the faithful and affectionate dumb creatures that depend upon
us for comfort and protection. A general distribution of these little
books among young people would do incalculable good, and it would give
their readers great pleasure, at the same time."--_Philadelphia (Pa.)
Times,_ May 16th, 1897.

The following list of interesting books was forwarded to us by a kind
young friend.                EDITOR.


     DEAR EDITOR:

     I like THE GREAT ROUND WORLD very much.

     I will name some books, so that others may read them. "Timothy's
     Quest" and "A Summer in a Canon" are very pretty stories by Kate
     Douglas Wiggin.

     "The Mysterious Island," "Abandoned," and "The Secret of the
     Island" are a set of books by Jules Verne. "The Fir Country,"
     "Twenty Thousand Leagues under the Sea," and "In Search of the
     Castaways" are all by him.

     "A New Alice in the Old Wonderland" is by Anna M. Richards, Jr.
     From an affectionate reader,

                                                ANNA H.
       NEW YORK, April 17th, 1897.




INVENTION AND DISCOVERY.


POCKET PROTECTOR.--This is an invention that should recommend itself as
much to girls as to boys.

It is a guard of rubber or other suitable material, which is laid inside
the pocket, and fitted with ribs and a spring which close the mouth of
the pocket at all times.

For the side pockets of coats it would seem to be a most desirable
invention, and for the pockets of skirts it seems the thing that we have
been looking for.

Every young girl knows how inconvenient it is to have no pocket in her
gown, and she also knows how strongly the dressmakers protest against
putting one in, because it is sure to gape open and look ugly.

With the self-closing protector the pocket would always be kept closed,
and if ladies can only persuade their dressmakers to use this new
invention, there is no reason why they should not once more have the
comfort and luxury of pockets in their gowns.


DEVICE FOR PLACING OR REMOVING PICTURE-HOOKS.

The spring-time, when half the world is moving, and the other half
house-cleaning, seems a very happy time for introducing the above
invention.

It is an arrangement attached to a long pole, and it is to be used to
place or remove picture-hooks and pictures.

The hooks are caught and held firmly by the two arms which project from
the device. They can then be lifted off the moulding without difficulty.

In the same manner the arms can be slipped under the wires of pictures,
which can thus be easily taken down.

This lifter will save many a climb of the step-ladder, besides doing the
work of hanging and removing pictures in one-half the time.

There is a new machine made for sharpening scissors.

The blades to be sharpened are passed through an opening in the side of
the machine, and are brought in contact with a bar, which is made of
emery or other sharpening material.

The bar is adjusted with springs which move back and forth with the
pressure of the blade, in such manner that a very fine edge can be put
on the metal to be sharpened.                  G.H.R.




LETTERS FROM OUR YOUNG FRIENDS.


     DEAR EDITOR:

     Mother and I have been reading THE GREAT ROUND WORLD all winter and
     have enjoyed it so much. I think it is a very valuable little
     magazine, you make everything seem so interesting. Halifax is
     rather a quaint city. It is noted for its beautiful scenery, fine
     harbor, park, and public gardens. It is an ideal place to spend the
     hot summer months in, and American tourists are learning more about
     us every year. A little girl visiting here from Boston last summer
     was asked one morning if she should like to go to the green market
     and see the Indians make and sell their baskets. She hesitated a
     moment, then said, "Well, if they are not wild Indians I would." I
     think strangers have an idea that the inhabitants of Halifax are
     nearly all Indians (we rarely see one except market days), that our
     noses are really blue in color, that our houses are covered with
     codfish-skins, and that our only article of diet is fish. This
     seems all very amusing to us. We are going to celebrate the Queen's
     Jubilee here next month. One feature of the celebration will be a
     grand Military Tournament. I saw one last year, and it _was_ grand.
     At the close there was a mimic battle between the British and the
     Arabs; it was very exciting. I was so interested that I said to my
     sister, "The Arabs fight just as well as the British," forgetting
     for a minute that they were all British. I think the American flag
     prettier than the flag of any other nation. There is a lovely story
     running through _St. Nicholas_, now. It is called "Miss Nina
     Barrow." It ought to delight every girl reader. Hoping I am not
     taking up too much of your valuable time with my letter, and
     wishing THE GREAT ROUND WORLD much success, I remain,

                                          Yours truly,
       HALIFAX, N.S., May 11th, 1897.        MARIE


     DEAR EDITOR:

     I am very much interested in the Cubans, and I hope that they will
     get free. I wish THE GREAT ROUND WORLD would tell more about it. We
     have your nice little book for our reading class. We all laughed
     right out when we read about the serpent down on the Florida coast,
     and the singing mouse. I will close now, wishing great success to
     THE GREAT ROUND WORLD.

                                              DALLAS S.
       CORNWALL-ON-THE-HUDSON, N.Y., May 3d, 1897.


     DEAR MR. EDITOR:

     Having read three of your GREAT ROUND WORLD books, I now let you
     know how I enjoyed them. I read many interesting things about the
     little island of Greece, and many other things. I read one book a
     day, and each week I send them to a friend in the country. She
     enjoys them very much.

                                Yours truly,
       NEW YORK, May 4th, 1897.        JESSIE B.G.



The Editor thanks Marie, Dallas S., and Jessie B.G. for their kindly and
pleasant letters.


     DEAR EDITOR:

     I take your GREAT ROUND WORLD and like it very much. I hope Greece
     will win in her war with Turkey, and Cuba in her war with Spain.
     General Weyler must be a very cruel man to kill the wounded Cuban
     soldiers who are in the hospitals. I hope the wars will soon stop
     and the countries be at peace. I enjoy your paper very much, it
     having many interesting accounts in it. I am very glad that the
     Czar of Russia is not going to make the exiles travel on foot any
     more to Siberia, and I think he must be a very nice ruler. Do you
     think the Cubans will win? I wish THE GREAT ROUND WORLD was
     published twice a week, as I like it so much. Did young Prince
     George of Greece marry that "Holy Child," as I think she is called?

                                         Yours truly,
EVANSVILLE, MD., May 12th, 1897.            NANNIE M.


DEAR NANNIE:

Thank you for your letter and kind words.

In regard to Prince George of Greece, our list of the reigning families
of Europe for 1897 states that he is unmarried.

                                            EDITOR.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Revised List, with Prices, of School-Books that will be taken in Exchange
for Subscriptions to "The Great Round World."=

READERS
    Appleton's Primer            5
        "      First            10
        "      Second           10
        "      Third            10
        "      Fourth           15
        "      Fifth            25
    Baldwin's Classics          10
    Barnes' First               10
      "     Second              10
      "     Third               15
      "     Fourth              20
      "     Fifth               25
    Butler's First               5
       "    Second              10
       "    Third               15
    Cyr's Primer                10
     "    First                 10
     "    Second                10
     "    Third                 15
    Davis' First                 5
      "    Second               10
      "    Third                15
    Eggleston's Great Americans 15
    Eng. Classics (Am. Bk. Co.) 10
    Gilmour's Revised First      5
       "         "    Second    10
       "         "    Third     10
       "         "    Fourth    20
    Harper's New First          10
      "       "  Second         10
      "       "  Third          15
      "       "  Fourth         20
      "       "  Fifth          30
    Hazen's First               10
      "     Second              10
      "     Third               15
      "     Fourth              20
      "     Fifth               25
      "     Child's First Book  10
    Holmes' New First            5
      "      "  Second          10
      "      "  Third           15
      "      "  Fourth          20
      "      "  Fifth           20
    Interstate First            10
        "      Second           10
        "      Third            15
    King's First Book           20
     "     Second "             20
     "     Third  "             20
     "     Fourth "             20
    Lippincott's First           5
         "       Second         10
    McGuffey's Revised Primer    5
       "          "    First     5
       "          "    Second   10
       "          "    Third    15
       "          "    Fourth   15
    Monroe's New Primer          5
      "       "  First          10
      "       "  Second         10
      "       "  Third          15
    New Franklin Primer          5
     "     "     First          10
     "     "     Second         10
     "     "     Third          15
     "     "     Fourth         20
     "     "     Fifth          25
    New Graded First             5
     "    "    Second           10
     "    "    Third            15
    Pollard's Revised Primer     5
       "         "    First      8
       "         "    Second    10
       "         "    Third     15
    Sheldon & Co.'s First        5
          "         Second      10
          "         Third       15
          "         Fourth      15
    Stickney's New First         5
        "       "  Second       10
        "       "  Third        10
        "       "  Fourth       15
        "       "  Fifth        20
    Swinton's Primer            10
       "      First             10
       "      Second            15
       "      Third             20
       "      Fourth            20
       "      Fifth             25
    Thompson's                  10
    Union First                  5
      "   Second                 5
    Watson's First               5
      "      Second             10
    Werner's Primer             10


SPELLERS
    Babcock's                     5
    Bailey's Scholar's Compan.   10
    Farrell's Grammar School     10
    Gilbert's School Studies      5
    Graves' (cloth cover)        10
    Harrington's Complete         5
    McGuffey's Revised            5
    Monroe's                      5
    Morse's                      10
    New American Primary          5
     "     "     Pronouncing      5
    Patterson's Com. School       5
    Reed's Word Lessons          10
    Swinton's Word Primer         5
       "       "   Book           5
    Town's Word Analysis         10
    Watson's Complete             5


HISTORIES
   Allen's Rome                             35
   Anderson's New General                   45
       "       "    Gram. Sch. (N.Y. ed.)   25
       "  Eng. (1895 or later)              35
   Barnes' Primary U.S.                     15
     "     Brief (after 1890)               35
     "     General                          60
   Eggleston's First Book                   20
       "       Large U.S.                   35
   Fiske's                                  35
   Gardiner's England                       35
   Greene's Short Hist. of Eng.             40
   Hansell's History                        20
   Hendrick's Empire State                  15
   Higginson's (after 1895)                 30
        "       England                     30
   Johnston's Shorter U.S.                  20
       "      Larger   "                    35
   Montgomery's Begins. U.S.                20
        "       Large    "                  35
        "       France                      35
        "       England                     35
   Mowry's U.S.                             30
   Myer's Greece                            35
     "    Rome                              35
   Myer's Medieval                          50
     "    General                           50
     "    Ancient                           50
   Parley's Universal (718 pp.)             25
   Ploetz' Epitome                          40
   Pratt's History Stories                  10
   Sheldon's Amer. History                  30
       "     General   "                    40
   Swinton's Outlines  "                    40
       "     N. School "                    30
   Thomas' United States                    30


ARITHMETICS
    Atwood's, Part 1                        10
       "       "   2                        15
    Bailey's Mental                         10
    Barnes' National                        20
    Bradbury's Practical (with Answers)     20
    Brooks' New Series                      15
    Butler's, Part 1                         5
       "  New Practical                     20
    Davies' Written                         10
      "     New Practical                   20
      "     University                      25
    Fish's, Part 1 (Am. B'k. Co.)           10
       "      "  2    "     "               20
    Franklin, Part 1                        15
        "      "   2                        25
    Greenleaf's Common School               15
        "       Complete (with Answers)     20
    Milnes' Elementary                      15
       "    Standard                        25
    Prince's, Parts, each                   10
        "     Practical                     25
    Ray's New Primary                        5
     "     "  Elementary                    10
     "     "  Practical                     20
     "     "  Higher                        25
    Robinson's Rudiments                    15
        "      Practical                    20
        "      Higher                       25
    Sanford's Primary                       10
        "     Common School                 20
        "     Higher                        25
    Sheldon's Elementary                    10

       *       *       *       *       *

=Send by Prepaid Express, put your name and address in package also full
list of the books. All books must be clean and perfect.=

_We can use new issues of all standard text books. Send list with titles
and dates._

       *       *       *       *       *

...PREMIUMS...

       *       *       *       *       *

TO ANY ONE SENDING US 4 NEW SUBSCRIBERS

[Illustration: A Pocket Kodak

     Measures 2-1/4 x 2-7/8 x 3-7/8 inches, makes a picture 1-1/2 x 2
     inches, and weighs only 5 ounces. Delivered ready for 12 exposures
     without reloading.]

The Lens is of the fixed focus type, and of sufficient length of focus
(2-1/2 inches) to avoid distortion.

Has improved rotary shutter and set of three stops for lens. The slides
for changing stops and for time exposures are alongside of the exposure
lever and always show by their position what stop is before the lens and
whether the shutter is set for time or instantaneous exposures, thus
acting as a warning.

In the _quality_ of the work they will do, Pocket Kodaks equal the best
cameras on the market. They make negatives of such perfect quality that
enlargements of any size can be made from them.

The Pocket Kodaks are covered with fine leather, and the trimmings are
handsomely finished and lacquered. They are elegant, artistic, and
durable.

=For one more subscription we will send with this camera a bicycle
carrying-case=

       *       *       *       *       *

TO ANY ONE SENDING US 9 NEW SUBSCRIBERS

[Illustration: An Improved
    =No. 4=
   Bulls-Eye

     For pictures 4x5 inches; delivered ready for 12 exposures without
     reloading. Size of camera, 4-7/8 x 5-7/8 x 9-1/4 inches; weight 2
     pounds 2 ounces; length of focus of lens, 6-1/4 inches.]

Fitted with an achromatic lens of superior quality, having a set of
three stops; has two finders, one for vertical and one for horizontal
exposures; and is also provided with two sockets for tripod screws, one
for vertical and one for horizontal exposures. Fitted with improved
rotary shutter, for snap-shots or time exposures. Can be loaded in
daylight. Handsomely finished and covered with leather.

=Both of the above cameras are manufactured by the Eastman Kodak Co.,
Rochester, N.Y., and this is a guarantee of their worth=

       *       *       *       *       *

THE GREAT ROUND WORLD
3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST.     NEW YORK CITY

       *       *       *       *       *

=PREMIUM LIST=

    In connection with our offer of any BICYCLE you wish for 100 new
    subscriptions, we have prepared a

=Premium Catalogue=

    This contains a list of selected articles which will be given to
    those who may obtain a smaller number of subscriptions

       *       *       *       *       *

Those who fail to secure the necessary number for the bicycle may make
selection from this catalogue.


       *       *       *       *       *

    =Copy mailed on receipt of 5c.=

       *       *       *       *       *

    =THE GREAT ROUND WORLD=
    =3 & 5 West 18th St, New York City=

       *       *       *       *       *






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is
Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 30, June 3, 1897, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD AND ***

***** This file should be named 15619.txt or 15619.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/5/6/1/15619/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.(www.pgdp.net)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
