The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is Going On
In It, Vol. 1, No. 60, December 30, 1897, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Great Round World and What Is Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 60, December 30, 1897
       A Weekly Magazine for Boys and Girls

Author: Various

Editor: Julia Truitt Bishop

Release Date: August 22, 2005 [EBook #16580]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD AND ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.(www.pgdp.net)








[Illustration: THE GREAT ROUND
WORLD
AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT.]

    VOL. 1   DECEMBER 30, 1897.   NO. 60

=Copyright, 1897, by THE GREAT ROUND WORLD Publishing Company.=

       *       *       *       *       *

The heavens are affording us an interesting study just now.

Our kind old friend, the sun, it is who is giving us this benefit.

One of the largest sun-spots which has ever been observed is now to be
seen.

So large is this spot that it is not necessary to look through a
telescope to see it. By using a smoked glass, to dim the intense light
of the sun, any one can look at the spot for himself.

Nowadays, when all persons connected with the daily papers are on the
lookout for some startling fact that shall sell their newspapers, such
an occurrence as the enormous increase in the size of a sun-spot is too
good to be let slip by them.

Extra editions about the sun-spot were issued by some of the most
enterprising journals, which contained sensational pictures, and
statements that the sun-spot was in fact a new world which was about to
burst forth from the body of the sun. According to these accounts, the
new world was to be sent whirling through space, hurled, as it were, at
our earth, which was to be shattered to pieces by it.

Except that such stories serve to call the attention of unscientific
people to scientific facts, and teach them to observe the wonders of the
universe, it really seems a shame that such marvels should be used as
bogies to scare the ignorant and superstitious.

As a matter of fact, very little is known about these sun-spots. They
occur in greatest numbers in periods of about eleven years apart, and
astronomers and geologists agree that periods of rainy and dry seasons
seem to correspond with the sun-spot periods.

When the greatest number of spots are visible on the sun, scientists
agree that the climatic conditions on the earth are normal and even.
When there are fewest spots on the sun we have extreme temperature and
sudden changes. When we say that astronomers and geologists agree on
this point, we must also admit that some astronomers are not quite
satisfied that the fact has been proved.

The only fact that has been actually proved to everybody's satisfaction
is that, during the time when the most spots are visible on the sun,
there are always more magnetic storms and displays of the aurora
borealis.

A magnetic storm is a disturbance of the magnetic field which surrounds
the earth; its presence is shown by a disturbance of the needle of the
compass, and it often interferes with the electrical currents, making it
difficult and sometimes impossible to use the telegraph-wires.

The aurora borealis is a wonderful light seen in the sky in high
latitudes, and less frequently in other parts of the world--except
during the activity of the sun-spots.

It appears as irregular patches and dancing columns of light which flame
across the sky. Red, white, pale green--these shafts are now dim, now
bright, seeming to throb and pulse as they glow and pale. As you watch
them they change their form, and, from being pillars of fire, change to
masses of glowing color.

A flash-light dancing across the sky gives you some, though a very poor
notion, of an aurora. The aurora has thousands of such flashes of light,
changing form and color as you watch them--filmy shafts of light, coming
you know not whence.

The spots on the sun are described as being dark patches which are
visible on the bright surface of the sun. They often appear in groups,
and frequently the larger spots will break up into smaller ones. They
are great depressions or holes in the surface of the sun, and are
supposed to be formed by descending currents of gases.

Sun-spots are generally found in the neighborhood of the sun's equator,
and last from a few hours to a few months.

The presence of these spots has enabled scientists to prove that the
sun, like the earth, revolves on its axis.

The last period of activity for sun-spots was in 1893, and, according to
the eleven-year theory, there should be few, if any, at this time. Prof.
Garret P. Serviss, however, tells us that at times during the quiet
period of the sun, large spots like the present one will appear on its
surface, and after assuming immense proportions, vanish.

The present phenomenon appears to be about one hundred thousand miles in
length, and some people insist that they can see it gradually detaching
itself from the sun and forming itself into a new world.

This is regarded as a hoax by scientific men who understand such
matters.

It is hard to prove exactly whether the present great sun-spot is a
large hole in the surface of the sun, or a large mass of the body of the
sun which is about to be detached from it; but in all such matters it is
wiser to take the most practical and least sensational view. Similar
phenomena to that which is now interesting us have been observed before,
and so, until we have proof to the contrary, it is more sensible to
believe it is a sun-spot than to listen to sensational tales of a new
world running wild through space.

Sun-spots were first observed about 1610 by Galileo, so they have been
known long enough for us to believe that they are not new worlds about
to be flung into space.

Galileo was the great Italian astronomer who invented the telescope.

The chances are that the present sun-spot may give us an opportunity of
seeing a fine aurora. In 1892, when the last large spot was visible,
there was a notable aurora. The light rays reached so far south that to
the people in New York it appeared like the reflection on the sky from a
great fire.

       *       *       *       *       *

Francis Kossuth's effort to get the Austro-Hungarian bill delayed has
not been successful.

You remember he tried to get the bill referred to a certain committee.

His motion was defeated by a large majority.

This looks rather promising for the bill which Baron Banffy is trying to
get through the House, and which, you remember, is to prolong the
contract between the two nations for another year; at the same time, the
best friends of the measure are doubtful if it will be possible to pass
it.

The mass of the Hungarian people are in sympathy with Kossuth, and would
be glad if Hungary could regain her freedom. It is therefore supposed
that when the bill comes up for a final hearing, Kossuth will use all
his fiery eloquence to dissuade the people from passing it, and that it
will be defeated.

Persons who are able to look at both sides of the question are of
opinion that separation would be a great misfortune for both countries.
Austro-Hungary is now a great and powerful kingdom, holding a position
in Europe which enables her to preserve the balance of peace in the
eastern portion of that troubled continent.

With Austria and Hungary divided into two small kingdoms with separate
aims and interests, Turkey could not be held in check any longer, and
the Russians, who are so full of ambition for power in the East, could
do pretty much as they pleased.

The Hungarians are supposed to be a very wide-awake people, and able to
comprehend the true meaning of a political situation. It is therefore
supposed that in the present crisis they are not striving so much for
freedom, which would be a disadvantage to them, as for the supremacy in
the two kingdoms.

This idea is outlined by Kossuth in a speech made by him the other day,
in which he said: "We want a separate army and separate treasury. The
King of Hungary should be Emperor of Austria as a sort of extra
occupation. Vienna (the capital of Austria) is already a suburb of
Budapest (the capital of Hungary), and in time Austria will become a
collection of provinces attached to Hungary."

       *       *       *       *       *

Rioting still continues in Prague. The troops are patrolling the street,
and special guards have been stationed at the places where outbreaks are
feared.

Numbers of arrests have been made, and it is said that the prisons are
so full that it has been found necessary to take no note of the smaller
offenders, and only hold those persons who are accused of serious
crimes.

In Vienna there has been a demonstration, unfriendly to both Hungarians
and Bohemians.

One morning the inhabitants of the city awoke to find the town covered
with flaming red placards.

Some of them read, "No new compact between Austria and Hungary"; and
others, "No language laws. German is the national language."

These placards naturally aroused a great deal of angry feeling between
the opposing parties. The police tore them down, and made every effort
to find the persons who had posted them, but without any result.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Treaty of Peace between Turkey and Greece has been finally signed by
the Powers interested.

Little notice has, however, been taken of the fact; matters in Europe
are looking so threatening that the affair of Greece is almost
forgotten.

It is said that war will break out in the Balkan provinces in the
spring, a war which will involve both Turkey and Austria.

The Balkan provinces are Servia, Roumania, Bulgaria, and Montenegro. If
you look at your map, you will see that they lie between Hungary and
Turkey.

The Sultan of Turkey is so convinced that such a war cannot be avoided,
that he is doing everything in his power to raise money for it.

He has given orders that the taxes must all be collected by the new
year, instead of May, in which month they are generally paid.

To accomplish this the unfortunate people, particularly the Christian
population, are being very roughly dealt with.

It is stated that the Sultan will not recall his troops from Thessaly
until the war indemnity has been paid, and that Germany is upholding him
in his determination.

       *       *       *       *       *

The reports of the various officers of our Government have followed the
Message of President McKinley.

Every one is somewhat shocked to find that the tariff bill, which was to
put such a lot of money in our treasury, has fallen far short of the
expected results, and, indeed, has not produced enough revenue to pay
the expenses of the Government.

If the receipts from customs are not larger during the next few months
than they have been during the last, the country will be $65,000,000
behind at the end of the year, and Congress will have to devise some
plan for raising this sum of money.

This means that some new tax will be imposed upon us, for the Government
must have the money it needs, and the people must help to make up what
is lacking.

The friends of the Dingley Bill hope that the custom receipts will
increase, and think that the reason they have been so small is that the
merchants brought so much stuff into the country before the bill went
into effect, that they have not needed to get fresh supplies so far. In
short, they claim the Dingley Bill needs a longer trial.

The enemies of the measure point out that, as a means of providing an
income for the Government, the Dingley Bill has been a failure.

We told you about the discussion as to the exact hour at which the bill
became a law.

The question is not as yet settled.

The importers, if you remember, declared that the bill only became a law
from the exact hour it was signed; the Government insists that it was a
law from early morning of the day on which it was signed.

Seventy-three importers have protested against paying duty for all day
July 24th, because the bill was not signed until six minutes past four
in the afternoon.

It is expected that a final decision will be given shortly, which will
put an end to the disagreement.

       *       *       *       *       *

Side by side with the fact that there is not enough money in the
treasury to meet the country's expenses, the armor-plate question has
come into prominence once more.

The naval officers and experts are all crying out against the folly of
the Government engaging in the manufacture of armor-plate.

The board of naval officers appointed to look into the subject stated,
in their report to the Government, that if such a factory is to be
maintained, Congress must order the building of three new battleships
every year.

The reason they give for this is that specially trained workmen are
required to operate an armor-plate factory. They think it would be
necessary to provide sufficient work every year to keep the factory
going. If the factory were to be shut down and the hands discharged, the
naval officers declare that the time and money that would have to be
spent in training fresh men to undertake the work then would cost the
country more than keeping the works open right along.

The Carnegie and Bethlehem people have succeeded in getting the
Government to test one of their plates made by the new Krupp process.

The result of the trial, it is expected, will decide whether the
Government shall buy its armor-plate as of old, or enter into the
manufacture itself.

If the Krupp process is satisfactory, armor-plates will not have to be
made so thick, and the smaller quantity of steel in them will perhaps
make them cheaper and enable the Government and the manufacturers to
agree upon a price that will be satisfactory to both.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Secretary of the Treasury has handed in the Currency report
mentioned by the President in his Message.

It proves to be very dry reading for all but men interested in the money
market, and would not interest you at all.

He suggests a plan, which is supposed to be a very wise one, for
removing all uncertainty about the soundness of our money. It is,
however, thought that the plan cannot be put into effect at present.

The Secretary of the Treasury has also made a report on filibustering,
which is much more interesting.

Spain has accused us of not taking proper steps to prevent these
unlawful expeditions.

If she can prove the truth of these accusations, she can demand that we
pay her a large sum of money as damages for every expedition that has
reached Cuba.

She would be quite justified in making these demands if the United
States willingly and wilfully helped Cuba to defy Spain, for every
shipload of supplies landed enables the Cubans to hold out so much
longer against Spain.

Under these circumstances, it is interesting to learn from the official
statement of the Secretary of the Treasury that we have done our duty to
the best of our ability.

Mr. Gage's report, like the Cuban remarks in the Message, has an added
interest from the fact that it is absolutely true.

Many of the reports we get through the newspapers have to be changed or
contradicted, no matter how careful the news-gatherers may have been in
selecting their information. This is because the reporters do not have
access to the official documents, and are obliged to base their reports
upon rumors or uncertain information.

When, however, a report comes direct from the Government, there is no
hearsay in the matter. Each department of the Government has the
documents relating to its business, and the reports it issues are made
from the actual letters that have passed between countries--despatches
and diplomatic documents which no outsider can ever hope to see.

Here, then, is Mr. Gage's report on filibustering.

He says that during two years and a half only six American vessels are
said to have successfully landed filibustering expeditions from the
United States in Cuba. Three foreign vessels are said to have been
successful in the same effort.

With the vessels referred to it is said that a dozen harbor tugs, three
or four lighters, a few small steamers, and about a dozen small sloops
and schooners have been associated.

That only six American vessels out of all our large merchant navy
succeeded in reaching Cuba is, the Secretary thinks, a proof of the
law-abiding spirit of the American people.

He says that eight revenue-cutters, with 317 men, have cruised 75,768
miles, patrolling the coast to prevent filibustering. These vessels
captured seven ships and 115 men, and broke up two expeditions.

He goes into the close examination of sixty expeditions which Spain
complains of.

Twenty of these he shows were stopped through the efforts of the
Treasury, five by the United States Navy, four by Spain, two were
wrecked, and one driven back by storm. One which is laid to our credit
the Secretary declines to acknowledge as belonging to us at all.

Of the successful expeditions, Mr. Gage points out that much was due to
the weakness of the Spanish patrol. In all the cases where the offenders
have been caught, he shows that they have either been punished or are
awaiting trial.

Concerning the case of the _Silver Heels_, the Secretary says that the
Collector of the Port of New York informed him that a representative of
the Spanish Consul stated to him that he did not desire the vessel to be
seized at the dock, but captured after departure therefrom. It was not,
therefore, so much negligence on the part of the Government, as speed on
the part of the _Silver Heels_, which enabled her to slip away from her
pursuers.

While we are on the subject of the _Silver Heels_, it will interest you
to know that she has been taken into custody.

She arrived at Wilmington the other day, and was at once seized by the
collector of that port.

An examination was made of the vessel, but nothing was found on board to
indicate that the ship had been engaged in unlawful work.

The crew have been subjected to a severe examination. Each man has had
to make a statement before the court.

The master and mate of the vessel swore that the _Silver Heels_ left New
York bound for Wilmington, N.C. Her cargo consisted of one hundred tons
of coal designed for sale in Wilmington.

On account of head winds she could not approach the coast, but was
buffeted about until a few days ago, when she cast anchor in Wilmington
harbor.

The two officers declared that no other cargo than the coal had been on
board, and that there had been no passengers.

The collector found the amount of coal in the ship that the master and
mate swore was there--and so far everything goes to prove that they have
been telling the truth.

The statements of the crew have been sent on to the Government, and the
vessel will be kept in custody as long as it is necessary in order that
a proper investigation may be made.

       *       *       *       *       *

After thinking matters over, the Spaniards have decided that President
McKinley's Message was not so friendly to them as they at first
supposed.

They have arrived at the conclusion that the part of the Message which
refers to intervention on our part in case Home Rule does not succeed,
is highly offensive to them.

Senor Sagasta is reported to have said that if the United States should
try to interfere between Spain and Cuba, Spain would be found ready to
protect herself and defend her national honor.

The heads of the Government then decided that Spain ought to increase
her navy, so that she should be ready in case of trouble. An endeavor
has been made to raise funds for this purpose, and one of the Spanish
Senators has suggested that a public subscription be opened for the
purpose.

A meeting of the Carlists has been called to protest against the
interference clause of the Message, and the Spaniards generally are much
annoyed over it.

General Weyler has not allowed the opportunity offered him by the
present unpopularity of the United States to pass him by.

He has been doing his best to convince the people that his recall was
due to our interference, and that, had he been allowed to remain in
Cuba, the island would have been pacified in a very short space of time.

He and his friends have been working industriously to raise him to the
position of a popular hero, and, taking advantage of some of the
President's remarks about the cruel methods of warfare employed in Cuba,
he says that he feels proud of the fact that the President attacks him,
as it is a proof that his conduct was displeasing to Spain's enemies.

Following up these remarks, which were published in all the Spanish
papers, Weyler determined to visit Madrid and pay his respects to the
Queen.

He and his friends evidently hoped that there would be some popular
demonstration in favor of their idol.

A holiday was chosen for his arrival, so that the lower classes might be
free to greet him, and a party of his admirers, several hundred strong,
went in a body to the depot to receive him.

Sagasta, learning of these arrangements, feared that some hot heads
might make an attack on the American embassy, and sent a special guard
to protect it.

He might, however, have spared himself the anxiety. The people took very
little notice of the great man's arrival, and made no demonstration
whatever. His arrival in the city seemed to be of very small importance
to any but his own personal friends.

       *       *       *       *       *

You will be glad to hear that Gen. Rius Rivera, the insurgent leader,
has been released from the Cabana fortress by a royal decree.

He has sailed for Cadiz, Spain, where he will remain in exile.

It is said that General Blanco sent for Rivera, and asked him if he
would promise not to take up arms against Spain if he were set free.

Rivera replied that as soon as he was free he would return to the
insurgent camp and fight for Cuba till the last drop of his blood was
spilled.

General Blanco then asked him if he would go to the rebels and offer
Home Rule to them.

This was met by another firm refusal. The Cubans are feeling very proud
of his bravery and firmness.

You will remember General Sanguilly promised, if he were freed, never to
fight against Spain, but Rivera prefers imprisonment or exile to giving
a pledge which he could never keep.

Rius Rivera was the general who took Maceo's command after that leader
had been killed. He was captured last March, while severely wounded.

There is a rumor that Gen. Julio Sanguilly has gone over to the Spanish
cause and offered his services to General Blanco.

It is impossible as yet to learn the truth of this rumor. The General,
over his own signature, indignantly denies it, and begs his friends to
deny it for him.

In spite of the fact that when he was released, through the intervention
of our Government, he had to sign an agreement not to return to Cuba, it
is said that Sanguilly would willingly head an expedition against Spain
to-morrow, if he only had the chance.

The Cuban Junta (or council) will not, however, send him, and it is said
that his willingness to go back on his promised word has made the Cubans
suspicious of him. They think that a man of honor would never have made
a promise he did not intend to keep, and therefore, in this hour of
trouble, when he is accused of being a traitor to his cause, he finds
few people willing to believe in him.

If he is indeed true to the cause, he is in a very sad position.

       *       *       *       *       *

It has been officially announced that General Pando has been heard from.
He is fighting Gomez, and from all we hear has the old Cuban leader at a
disadvantage.

Gomez, so the story goes, is being forced to retreat before him in hot
haste.

It is also said that none of the messengers has returned who were sent
out by Pando to offer Home Rule to the Cuban army.

It is supposed that they have been killed by the insurgents.

There is much discouragement in Havana over the present aspect of
affairs. There seems to be no hope for a speedy end to the revolution.

       *       *       *       *       *

We have had inquiries about the Esquimaux who were brought over here by
Lieutenant Peary, when he brought the great meteorite from the Arctic
regions.

These poor people have not been having a happy time of it.

This climate is so much warmer than their own and so different from it
in every respect, that they had not been here very long before they all
fell ill.

The attendants at the Natural History Museum, where they were taken,
said that they first learned there was anything the matter with their
charges by hearing them give voice to strange and grunting noises.

The party of Esquimaux were allowed to wander at will through the
museum, and they spent much of their time roaming from room to room
looking at the exhibits. No one interfered with them.

The museum is a place for study, and loud talking is never permitted.
When, therefore, the attendants heard these very peculiar grunts, they
began to look around to find who was daring to make so much noise.

I am afraid they suspected that some small boys were playing tricks.

They were much surprised to find that these dismal sounds came from the
Esquimaux.

One of the officials, being unable to pacify them, took them all in
charge and hurried them off to a quiet part of the building, sending at
the same time for a doctor.

On examination it was found that the poor creatures had caught cold from
the warmth of our climate, and were suffering from bronchitis.

They were all hurried off to Bellevue Hospital, where they were given
the kindest care.

It was found that they could not stand the heat of the hospital wards,
and so a nice cool cellar was prepared for them, and they gradually got
better.

Lieutenant Peary, who had been told of their illness, telegraphed from
the West, where he was lecturing, that they must have plenty of fresh
air; so, as soon as they were able to leave the hospital, they were
taken out of the city.

A cottage was hired for them at High Bridge, which is a little village
on the Harlem River, a few miles out of New York.

The Esquimaux are allowed to wander about there pretty much as they
please, and it is hoped they will continue in good health throughout the
winter.

They have not been able to do any work as yet, having been too ill to
attempt it. As soon as they are quite well again they will probably
begin their task, but great care will be taken to have the temperature
right for them the next time they are in the museum.

It is said that they were well pleased with the wretched fogs we have
been having of late. Fogs are very frequent in Greenland, and the
inclement weather made the Esquimaux feel much more at home.

They are looking forward anxiously to the spring, when Lieutenant Peary
has promised that he will take them home.

       *       *       *       *       *

January 1st will be an important day for the citizens of New York.

It will be the birthday of the city of Greater New York, which will take
its rank as the second largest capital in the world.

The mayor, Mr. Strong, is anxious to have some celebration which shall
mark the passing away of the old New York city.

Many people are, however, opposed to this. They think that the first
thing in people's minds should be the glory of the great new city which
is to be born, and declare that anything else would only amount to
holding funeral services over the old city.

This view seems hardly the correct one to take. There is so much of the
nation's early history wound around the old city of New York, that it
seems only fit and proper that some suitable exercises should be held,
to impress upon the younger generation the importance of the old city,
before it passes away and loses its identity in the larger city.

If Boston was the scene of the beginning of the War of Independence, New
York witnessed its close.

On November 25th, 1782, the British finally evacuated the city of New
York, their last stronghold, and the long and painful war was over.

The history of New York begins in 1524, when Giovanni Verrazano, an
Italian navigator, entered the beautiful bay of New York, with his
vessel, the _Dauphine_. Gomez is said to have sailed along the coast as
far as New York the following year.

Fifty years later, Hendrik Hudson sailed up New York Bay, and discovered
the beautiful river which flows by the city, the river which still bears
his name.

This is the same Hudson who searched for the Northwest Passage--the
passage which was to make a short cut from the Atlantic Ocean to the
Pacific, along the north shore of America, and afford a highway between
Europe and Asia, saving the long trip around the Cape of Good Hope,
which had just been discovered by the Portuguese. South America and Cape
Horn were as yet undiscovered.

On this search for the Northwest Passage, Hudson's sailors mutinied, and
put their great commander and eight companions ashore in an open boat in
the bleak, ice-bound Hudson Bay.

For this cruel deed the spirits of the crew of Hudson's vessel were
supposed to wander up and down the shores of the Hudson River, unable to
find rest even in death.

In Washington Irving's fanciful tale of "Rip Van Winkle," Rip encounters
a strange, ghostly company of seafaring men, and it is often supposed
that Hudson's crew was intended by the author.

When Hudson went back to Holland after his voyage up the Hudson River,
he told such wonderful tales of the friendliness of the Indians, the
number of fur-bearing animals he had seen, and the wonders he had met
with, that the Hollanders became much excited and determined to send out
and claim the newly discovered country.

In 1610 a vessel was sent out, and the Indians proving friendly and the
trade satisfactory, a colony was finally established in 1613 on the
southern point of Manhattan Island.

This was near where the Battery now is.

The first permanent settlement was made in 1622, the Dutch having taken
possession of the country around the Hudson River, calling it New
Netherlands.

In 1626 the West India Company sent out a settlement under Gov. Peter
Minuit.

He landed on the island of Manhattan, and soon entered into a trade with
the Indians, buying from them the entire island of Manhattan, fourteen
thousand acres in size, for twenty-four dollars' worth of scarlet cloth,
brass buttons, and other trinkets.

The Dutch gave the island the name of New Amsterdam, and established on
it a settlement consisting of a fort, a stone warehouse, and a cluster
of log-huts.

After the Dutch had established their colony of New Amsterdam, they
endeavored to colonize it on the Patroon system.

By this system, any man who undertook to bring fifty settlers to the
colony within five years was given the title of Patroon, and was allowed
to lay claim to and hold all the land he desired and could properly
cultivate.

It was in this way that the Van Rensselaers, the Schuylers, and the Van
Cortlandts became important families in New York.

In 1647 Peter Stuyvesant came out to New Amsterdam as governor. He was
the last governor of the province.

He was familiarly known as "Old Silverleg," because, having lost one
limb in battle, he had it replaced by a sturdy wooden leg securely bound
with silver.

Many of our traditions date back to the time of this hot-tempered,
headstrong, and fine old gentleman.

His estate was called the Great Bouery, and there was a long and
beautiful lane leading from the city to it, which was known as Bouery
Lane--our present Bowery.

The Governor's house is supposed to have stood near Tenth Street, a
little east of Third Avenue, now called Stuyvesant Place.

Beyond Governor Stuyvesant's Great Bouery stretched swamps, woods, and
clearings, until a little village was reached at the junction of the
Haarlem and East rivers, which was called New Haarlem.

Peter Stuyvesant made many improvements in the city of New Amsterdam. In
order better to protect it, he built a high and strong wooden palisade
on the north of the town; in time houses grew up along this wall, and
the street which they formed was called Wall Street.

The Wall Street of to-day, where so many fortunes are made and lost,
stands on the site of the old wall built by Peter Stuyvesant to protect
the city.

The first windmill was built in 1662.

In 1664 Charles II. of England, jealous of the productiveness of this
Dutch colony, determined to secure it.

In 1621 James I. had claimed it by right of first occupancy.

In 1632 Charles I. reasserted this claim; and in 1654 Cromwell ordered
an expedition for the conquest of the New Netherlands.

The treaty with Holland stopped these proceedings, and the colony was
left in peace until 1664, when Charles II. granted the entire territory
to his brother, the Duke of York.

In August of that year an expedition arrived to capture the city, which
surrendered to the English fleet without resistance. The name of the
city was then changed to New York, in honor of its ducal owner.

In 1673 the Dutch recaptured the city, and christened it New Orange. The
following year, by a treaty of peace with Holland, it was restored to
the English and again called New York.

In 1702 Wall Street was paved, and in 1711 a regular slave market was
established.

In 1775, at the beginning of the war, New York declared for
independence, but in 1776 it fell into the hands of the English, who
retained possession until 1783, when they finally evacuated it.

In 1788 New York celebrated the adoption of the Constitution--the great
Constitution under which we live to-day and enjoy our freedom. A ship,
representing the Ship of State, was drawn through the streets of the
city by ten milk-white horses.

Alexander Hamilton had done so much to convince the State of the wisdom
of adopting the Constitution, that in recognition of his great services
the platform upholding the Ship of State was inscribed in large letters
with his name.

New Yorkers must never forget that it was in their city that the first
President was inaugurated, and that that President was George
Washington. To New York belongs the greatest honor any American city can
boast, in having placed the sceptre of government in the hands of the
greatest man the country has ever produced.

On March 4th, 1789, the new Constitution went into operation, but it was
not until April 30th that the President took the oath of office.

Standing on the balcony of a building in front of Federal Hall, where
Congress met, and in the presence of an immense multitude, George
Washington took the following oath:

"I do solemnly swear that I will faithfully execute the office of
President of the United States; and to the best of my ability, preserve,
protect, and defend the Constitution of the United States."

Then, amid the ringing of bells, the firing of cannon, a great shout
went up, "Long live George Washington, President of the United States."

It was the streets of New York that first resounded to this glorious
cry!

Federal Hall was the old City Hall. It stood on the northeast corner of
Wall and Nassau streets, on ground now occupied by the United States
Sub-Treasury.

New Yorkers have much to be proud of in their city.      G.H. ROSENFELD.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is
Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 60, December 30, 1897, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD AND ***

***** This file should be named 16580.txt or 16580.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/6/5/8/16580/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.(www.pgdp.net)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

