The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Head of The Family, by W.W. Jacobs

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Head of The Family
       Sailor's Knots, Part 9.

Author: W.W. Jacobs

Release Date: January 22, 2004 [EBook #10789]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HEAD OF THE FAMILY ***




Produced by David Widger




SAILORS' KNOTS

By W.W. Jacobs


1909



THE HEAD OF THE FAMILY


Mr. Letts had left his ship by mutual arrangement, and the whole of the
crew had mustered to see him off and to express their sense of relief at
his departure.  After some years spent in long voyages, he had fancied a
trip on a coaster as a change, and, the schooner Curlew having no use for
a ship's carpenter, had shipped as cook.  He had done his best, and the
unpleasant epithets that followed him along the quay at Dunchurch as he
followed in the wake of his sea-chest were the result.  Master and mate
nodded in grim appreciation of the crew's efforts.

[Illustration: "After some years spent in long voyages"]

He put his chest up at a seamen's lodging-house, and, by no means
perturbed at this sudden change in his fortunes, sat on a seat
overlooking the sea, with a cigarette between his lips, forming plans for
his future.  His eyes closed, and he opened them with a start to find
that a middle-aged woman of pleasant but careworn appearance had taken
the other end of the bench.

"Fine day," said Mr. Letts, lighting another cigarette.

The woman assented and sat looking over the sea.

"Ever done any cooking?"  asked Mr. Letts, presently.

"Plenty," was the surprised reply.  "Why?"

"I just wanted to ask you how long you would boil a bit o' beef," said
Mr. Letts.  "Only from curiosity; I should never ship as cook again."

He narrated his experience of the last few days, and, finding the
listener sympathetic, talked at some length about himself and his
voyages; also of his plans for the future.

"I lost my son at sea," said the woman, with a sigh.  "You favor him
rather."

Mr. Letts's face softened.  "Sorry," he said.  "Sorry you lost him, I
mean."

"At least, I suppose he would have been like you," said the other; "but
it's nine years ago now.  He was just sixteen."

Mr. Letts--after a calculation--nodded.  "Just my age," he said.  "I was
twenty-five last March."

"Sailed for Melbourne," said the woman.  "My only boy."

Mr. Letts cleared his throat, sympathetically.

"His father died a week after he sailed," continued the other, "and three
months afterwards my boy's ship went down.  Two years ago, like a fool, I
married again.  I don't know why I'm talking to you like this.  I suppose
it is because you remind me of him."

"You talk away as much as you like," said Mr. Letts, kindly.  "I've got
nothing to do."

He lit another cigarette, and, sitting in an attitude of attention,
listened to a recital of domestic trouble that made him congratulate
himself upon remaining single.

"Since I married Mr. Green I can't call my soul my own," said the victim
of matrimony as she rose to depart.  "If my poor boy had lived things
would have been different.  His father left the house and furniture to
him, and that's all my second married me for, I'm sure.  That and the bit
o' money that was left to me.  He's selling some of my boy's furniture at
this very moment.  That's why I came out; I couldn't bear it."

"P'r'aps he'll turn up after all," said Mr. Letts.  "Never say die."

Mrs. Green shook her head.

"I s'pose," said Mr. Letts, regarding her--"I s'pose you don't let
lodgings for a night or two?"  Mrs. Green shook her head again.

"It don't matter," said the young man.  "Only I would sooner stay with
you than at a lodging-house.  I've taken a fancy to you.  I say, it would
be a lark if you did, and I went there and your husband thought I was
your son, wouldn't it?"

Mrs. Green caught her breath, and sitting down again took his arm in her
trembling fingers.

"Suppose," she said, unsteadily--"suppose you came round and pretended to
be my son--pretended to be my son, and stood up for me?"

Mr. Letts stared at her in amazement, and then began to laugh.

"Nobody would know," continued the other, quickly.  "We only came to this
place just before he sailed, and his sister was only ten at the time.
She wouldn't remember."

Mr. Letts said he couldn't think of it, and sat staring, with an air of
great determination, at the sea.  Arguments and entreaties left him
unmoved, and he was just about to express his sorrow for her troubles and
leave, when she gave a sudden start and put her arm through his.

"Here comes your sister!" she exclaimed.

Mr. Letts started in his turn.

"She has seen me holding your arm," continued Mrs. Green, in a tense
whisper.  "It's the only way I can explain it.  Mind, your name is Jack
Foster and hers is Betty."

Mr. Letts gazed at her in consternation, and then, raising his eyes,
regarded with much approval the girl who was approaching.  It seemed
impossible that she could be Mrs. Green's daughter, and in the excitement
of the moment he nearly said so.

"Betty," said Mrs. Green, in a voice to which nervousness had imparted
almost the correct note--"Betty, this is your brother Jack!"

Mr. Letts rose sheepishly, and then to his great amazement a pair of
strong young arms were flung round his neck, and a pair of warm lips--
after but slight trouble--found his. Then and there Mr. Letts's mind was
made up.

[Illustration: "Then and there Mr. Letts's mind was made up.]

"Oh, Jack!"  said Miss Foster, and began to cry softly.

"Oh, Jack!"  said Mrs. Green, and, moved by thoughts, perhaps, of what
might have been, began to cry too.

"There, there!" said Mr. Letts.

He drew Miss Foster to the seat, and, sitting between them, sat with an
arm round each.  There was nothing in sight but a sail or two in the far
distance, and he allowed Miss Foster's head to lie upon his shoulder
undisturbed.  An only child, and an orphan, he felt for the first time
the blessing of a sister's love.

"Why didn't you come home before?" murmured the girl.

Mr. Letts started and squinted reproachfully at the top of her hat.  Then
he turned and looked at Mrs. Green in search of the required information.
"He was shipwrecked," said Mrs. Green.

"I was shipwrecked," repeated Mr. Letts, nodding.

"And had brain-fever after it through being in the water so long, and
lost his memory," continued Mrs. Green.

"It's wonderful what water will do--salt water," said Mr. Letts, in
confirmation.

Miss Foster sighed, and, raising the hand which was round her waist, bent
her head and kissed it.  Mr. Letts colored, and squeezed her
convulsively.

Assisted by Mrs. Green he became reminiscent, and, in a low voice,
narrated such incidents of his career as had escaped the assaults of the
brain-fever.  That his head was not permanently injured was proved by the
perfect manner in which he remembered incidents of his childhood narrated
by his newly found mother and sister.  He even volunteered one or two
himself which had happened when the latter was a year or two old.

"And now," said Mrs. Green, in a somewhat trembling voice, "we must go
and tell your step-father."

Mr. Letts responded, but without briskness, and, with such moral support
as an arm of each could afford, walked slowly back.  Arrived at a road of
substantial cottages at the back of the town, Mrs. Green gasped, and,
coming to a standstill, nodded at a van that stood half-way up the road.

"There it is," she exclaimed.

"What?" demanded Mr. Letts.

"The furniture I told you about," said Mrs. Green.  "The furniture that
your poor father thought such a lot of, because it used to belong to his
grandfather.  He's selling it to Simpson, though I begged and prayed him
not to."

Mr. Letts encouraged himself with a deep cough.  "My furniture?" he
demanded.

Mrs. Green took courage.  "Yes," she said, hope-fully; "your father left
it to you."

Mr. Letts, carrying his head very erect, took a firmer grip of their arms
and gazed steadily at a disagreeable-looking man who was eying them in
some astonishment from the doorway.  With arms still linked they found
the narrow gateway somewhat difficult, but they negotiated it by a
turning movement, and, standing in the front garden, waited while Mrs.
Green tried to find her voice.

[Illustration: "A disagreeable-looking man was eying them in some
astonishment from the doorway."]

"Jack," she said at last, "this is your stepfather."

Mr. Letts, in some difficulty as to the etiquette on such occasions,
released his right arm and extended his hand.

"Good-evening, stepfather," he said, cheerfully.

Mr. Green drew back a little and regarded him unfavorably.

"We--we thought you was drowned," he said at last.

"I was nearly," said Mr. Letts.

"We all thought so," pursued Mr. Green, grudgingly.  "Everybody thought
so."

He stood aside, as a short, hot-faced man, with a small bureau clasped in
his arms and supported on his knees, emerged from the house and staggered
towards the gate.  Mr. Letts reflected.

"Halloa!" he said, suddenly.  "Why, are you moving, mother?"

Mrs. Green sniffed sadly and shook her head.  "Well," said Mr. Letts,
with an admirable stare, "what's that chap doing with my furniture?"

"Eh?" spluttered Mr. Green.  "What?"

"I say, what's he doing with my furniture?"  repeated Mr. Letts, sternly.

Mr. Green waved his arm.  "That's all right," he said, conclusively;
"he's bought it.  Your mother knows."

"But it ain't all right," said Mr. Letts.  "Here! bring that back, and
those chairs too."

The dealer, who had just placed the bureau on the tail-board of the van,
came back wiping his brow with his sleeve.

"Wots the little game?" he demanded.

Mr. Letts left the answer to Mr. Green, and going to the van took up the
bureau and walked back to the house with it.  Mr. Green and the dealer
parted a little at his approach, and after widening the parting with the
bureau he placed it in the front room while he went back for the chairs.
He came back with three of them, and was, not without reason, called a
porcupine by the indignant dealer.

He was relieved to find, after Mr. Simpson had taken his departure, that
Mr. Green was in no mood for catechising him, and had evidently accepted
the story of his escape and return as a particularly disagreeable fact.
So disagreeable that the less he heard of it the better.

"I hope you've not come home after all these years to make things
unpleasant?"  he remarked presently, as they sat at tea.

"I couldn't be unpleasant if I tried," said Mr. Letts.

"We've been very happy and comfortable here--me and your mother and
sister," continued Mr. Green.  "Haven't we, Emily?"

"Yes," said his wife, with nervous quickness.

"And I hope you'll be the same," said Mr. Green.  "It's my wish that you
should make yourself quite comfortable here--till you go to sea again."

"Thankee," said Mr. Letts; "but I don't think I shall go to sea any more.
Ship's carpenter is my trade, and I've been told more than once that I
should do better ashore.  Besides, I don't want to lose mother and Betty
again."

He placed his arm round the girl's waist, and, drawing her head on to his
shoulder, met with a blank stare the troubled gaze of Mrs. Green.

"I'm told there's wonderful openings for carpenters in Australia," said
Mr. Green, trying to speak in level tones.  "Wonderful!  A good carpenter
can make a fortune there in ten years, so I'm told."

Mr. Letts, with a slight wink at Mrs. Green and a reassuring squeeze with
his left arm, turned an attentive ear.

"O' course, there's a difficulty," he said, slowly, as Mr. Green finished
a vivid picture of the joys of carpentering in Australia.

"Difficulty?" said the other.

"Money to start with," explained Mr. Letts.  "It's no good starting
without money.  I wonder how much this house and furniture would fetch?
Is it all mine, mother?"

"M-m-most of it," stammered Mrs. Green, gazing in a fascinated fashion at
the contorted visage of her husband.

"All except a chair in the kitchen and three stair-rods," said Betty.

"Speak when you're spoke to, miss!"  snarled her stepfather.  "When we
married we mixed our furniture up together--mixed it up so that it would
be impossible to tell which is which.  Nobody could."

"For the matter o' that, you could have all the kitchen chairs and all
the stair-rods," said Mr. Letts, generously.  "However, I don't want to
do anything in a hurry, and I shouldn't dream of going to Australia
without Betty.  It rests with her."

"She's going to be married," said Mr. Green, hastily; "and if she wasn't
she wouldn't turn her poor, ailing mother out of house and home, that I`m
certain of.  She's not that sort.  We've had a word or two at times--me
and her--but I know a good daughter when I see one."

"Married?"  echoed Mr. Letts, as his left arm relaxed its pressure.  "Who
to?"

"Young fellow o' the name of Henry Widden," replied Mr. Green, "a very
steady young fellow; a great friend of mine."

"Oh!" said Mr. Letts, blankly.

"I'd got an idea, which I've been keeping as a little surprise,"
continued Mr. Green, speaking very rapidly, "of them living here with us,
and saving house-rent and furniture."

Mr. Letts surveyed him with a dejected eye.

"It would be a fine start for them," continued the benevolent Mr. Green.

Mr. Letts, by a strong effort, regained his composure.

"I must have a look at him first," he said, briskly.  "He mightn't meet
with my approval."

"Eh?" said Mr. Green, starting.  "Why, if Betty----"

"I must think it over," interrupted Mr. Letts, with a wave of his hand.
"Betty is only nineteen, and, as head of the family, I don't think she
can marry without my consent.  I'm not sure, but I don't think so.
Anyway, if she does, I won't have her husband here sitting in my chairs,
eating off my tables, sleeping in my beds, wearing out my stair-rods,
helping himself----"

"Stow it," said Miss Foster, calmly.

Mr. Letts started, and lost the thread of his discourse.  "I must have a
look at him," he concluded, lamely; "he may be all right, but then,
again, he mightn't."

He finished his tea almost in silence, and, the meal over, emphasized his
position as head of the family by taking the easy-chair, a piece of
furniture sacred to Mr. Green, and subjecting that injured man to a
catechism which strained his powers of endurance almost to breaking-
point.

"Well, I sha'n't make any change at present," said Mr. Letts, when the
task was finished.  "There's plenty of room here for us all, and, so long
as you and me agree, things can go on as they are.  To-morrow morning I
shall go out and look for a job."

He found a temporary one almost at once, and, determined to make a
favorable impression, worked hard all day.  He came home tired and dirty,
and was about to go straight to the wash-house to make his toilet when
Mr. Green called him in.

"My friend, Mr. Widden," he said, with a satisfied air, as he pointed to
a slight, fair young man with a well-trimmed moustache.

Mr. Letts shook hands.

"Fine day," said Mr. Widden.

"Beautiful," said the other.  "I'll come in and have a talk about it when
I've had a wash."

"Me and Miss Foster are going out for a bit of a stroll," said Mr.
Widden.

"Quite right," agreed Mr. Letts.  "Much more healthy than staying indoors
all the evening.  If you just wait while I have a wash and a bit o'
something to eat I'll come with you."

"Co-come with us!"  said Mr. Widden, after an astonished pause.

Mr. Letts nodded.  "You see, I don't know you yet," he explained, "and as
head of the family I want to see how you behave yourself.  Properly
speaking, my consent ought to have been asked before you walked out with
her; still, as everybody thought I was drowned, I'll say no more about
it."

"Mr. Green knows all about me," said Mr. Widden, rebelliously.

"It's nothing to do with him," declared Mr. Letts.  "And, besides, he's
not what I should call a judge of character.  I dare say you are all
right, but I'm going to see for myself.  You go on in the ordinary way
with your love-making, without taking any notice of me.  Try and forget
I'm watching you.  Be as natural as you can be, and if you do anything I
don't like I'll soon tell you of it."

The bewildered Mr. Widden turned, but, reading no hope of assistance in
the infuriated eyes of Mr. Green, appealed in despair to Betty.

"I don't mind," she said.  "Why should I?"

Mr. Widden could have supplied her with many reasons, but he refrained,
and sat in sulky silence while Mr. Letts got ready.  From his point of
view the experiment was by no means a success, his efforts to be natural
being met with amazed glances from Mr. Letts and disdainful requests from
Miss Foster to go home if he couldn't behave himself.  When he relapsed
into moody silence Mr. Letts cleared his throat and spoke.

"There's no need to be like a monkey-on-a-stick, and at the same time
there's no need to be sulky," he pointed out; "there's a happy medium."

"Like you, I s'pose?" said the frantic suitor.  "Like me," said the
other, gravely.  "Now, you watch; fall in behind and watch."

He drew Miss Foster's arm through his and, leaning towards her with
tender deference, began a long conversation.  At the end of ten minutes
Mr. Widden intimated that he thought he had learned enough to go on with.

"Ah! that's only your conceit," said Mr. Letts over his shoulder.  "I was
afraid you was conceited."

He turned to Miss Foster again, and Mr. Widden, with a despairing
gesture, abandoned himself to gloom.  He made no further interruptions,
but at the conclusion of the walk hesitated so long on the door-step that
Mr. Letts had to take the initiative.

"Good-night," he said, shaking hands.  "Come round to-morrow night and
I'll give you another lesson.  You're a slow learner, that's what you
are; a slow learner."

He gave Mr. Widden a lesson on the following evening, but cautioned him
sternly against imitating the display of brotherly fondness of which, in
a secluded lane, he had been a wide-eyed observer.

"When you've known her as long as I have--nineteen years," said Mr.
Letts, as the other protested, "things'll be a bit different.  I might
not be here, for one thing."

By exercise of great self-control Mr. Widden checked the obvious retort
and walked doggedly in the rear of Miss Foster.  Then, hardly able to
believe his ears, he heard her say something to Mr. Letts.

"Eh?" said that gentleman, in amazed accents.

"You fall behind," said Miss Foster.

"That--that's not the way to talk to the head of the family," said Mr.
Letts, feebly.

"It's the way I talk to him," rejoined the girl.

It was a position for which Mr. Letts was totally unprepared, and the
satisfied smile of Mr. Widden as he took the vacant place by no means
improved matters.  In a state of considerable dismay Mr. Letts dropped
farther and farther behind until, looking up, he saw Miss Foster,
attended by her restive escort, quietly waiting for him.  An odd look in
her eyes as they met his gave him food for thought for the rest of the
evening.

At the end of what Mr. Letts was pleased to term a month's trial, Mr.
Widden was still unable to satisfy him as to his fitness for the position
of brother-in-law.  In a spirit of gloom he made suggestions of a
mutinous nature to Mr. Green, but that gentleman, who had returned one
day pale and furious, but tamed, from an interview that related to his
treatment of his wife, held out no hopes of assistance.

"I wash my hands of him," he said bitterly.  "You stick to it; that's
all you can do."

"They lost me last night," said the unfortunate.  "I stayed behind just
to take a stone out of my shoe, and the earth seemed to swallow them up.
He's so strong.  That's the worst of it."

"Strong?" said Mr. Green.

Mr. Widden nodded.  "Tuesday evening he showed her how he upset a man
once and stood him on his head," he said, irritably.  "I was what he
showed her with."

"Stick to it!" counselled Mr. Green again.  "A brother and sister are
bound to get tired of each other before long; it's nature."

Mr. Widden sighed and obeyed.  But brother and sister showed no signs of
tiring of each other's company, while they displayed unmistakable signs
of weariness with his.  And three weeks later Mr. Letts, in a few
well-chosen words, kindly but firmly dismissed him.

"I should never give my consent," he said, gravely, "so it's only wasting
your time.  You run off and play."

Mr. Widden ran off to Mr. Green, but before he could get a word out
discovered that something unusual had happened.  Mrs. Green, a picture of
distress, sat at one end of the room with a handkerchief to her eyes; Mr.
Green, in a condition compounded of joy and rage, was striding violently
up and down the room.

"He's a fraud!" he shouted.  "A fraud!  I've had my suspicions for some
time, and this evening I got it out of her."

Mr. Widden stared in amazement.

"I got it out of her," repeated Mr. Green, pointing at the trembling
woman.  "He's no more her son than what you are."

"What?" said the amazed listener.

"She's been deceiving me," said Mr. Green, with a scowl, "but I don't
think she'll do it again in a hurry.  You stay here," he shouted, as his
wife rose to leave the room.  "I want you to be here when he comes in."

Mrs. Green stayed, and the other two, heedless of her presence, discussed
the situation until the front door was heard to open, and Mr. Letts and
Betty came into the room.  With a little cry the girl ran to her mother.

"What's the matter?" she cried.

"She's lost another son," said Mr. Green, with a ferocious sneer--"a
flash, bullying, ugly chap of the name o' Letts."

"Halloa!" said Mr. Letts, starting.

"A chap she picked up out of the street, and tried to pass off on me as
her son," continued Mr. Green, raising his voice.  "She ain't heard the
end of it yet, I can tell you."

Mr. Letts fidgeted.  "You leave her alone," he said, mildly.  "It's true
I'm not her son, but it don't matter, because I've been to see a lawyer
about her, and he told me that this house and half the furniture belongs
by law to Betty.  It's got nothing to do with you."

"Indeed!"  said Mr. Green.  "Now you take yourself off before I put the
police on to you.  Take your face off these premises."

Mr. Letts, scratching his head, looked vaguely round the room.

"Go on!"  vociferated Mr. Green.  "Or will you have the police to put you
out?"

Mr. Letts cleared his throat and moved towards the door.  "You stick up
for your rights, my girl," he said, turning to Betty.  "If he don't treat
your mother well, give him back his kitchen chair and his three
stair-rods and pack him off."

"Henry," said Mr. Green, with dangerous calm, "go and fetch a policeman."

"I'm going," said Mr. Letts, hastily.  "Good-by, Betty; good-by, mother.
I sha'n't be long.  I'm only going as far as the post-office.  And that
reminds me.  I've been talking so much that I quite forget to tell you
that Betty and me were married yesterday morning."

He nodded pleasantly at the stupefied Mr. Green, and, turning to Mr.
Widden, gave him a friendly dig in the ribs with his finger.

"What's mine is Betty's," he said, in a clear voice, "and what's Betty's
is MINE!  D'ye understand, step-father?"

He stepped over to Mrs. Green, and putting a strong arm around her raised
her to her feet.  "And what's mine is mother's," he concluded, and,
helping her across the room, placed her in the best arm-chair.

[Illustration: "What's mine is mother's."]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Head of The Family, by W.W. Jacobs

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HEAD OF THE FAMILY ***

***** This file should be named 10789.txt or 10789.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/7/8/10789/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


