The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Well, by W.W. Jacobs

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Well
       The Lady of the Barge and Others, Part 4.

Author: W.W. Jacobs

Release Date: April 22, 2004 [EBook #12124]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WELL ***




Produced by David Widger




THE LADY OF THE BARGE

AND OTHER STORIES

By W. W. Jacobs




THE WELL


Two men stood in the billiard-room of an old country house, talking.
Play, which had been of a half-hearted nature, was over, and they sat at
the open window, looking out over the park stretching away beneath them,
conversing idly.

"Your time's nearly up, Jem," said one at length, "this time six weeks
you'll be yawning out the honeymoon and cursing the man--woman I mean--
who invented them."

Jem Benson stretched his long limbs in the chair and grunted in dissent.

"I've never understood it," continued Wilfred Carr, yawning.  "It's not
in my line at all; I never had enough money for my own wants, let alone
for two.  Perhaps if I were as rich as you or Croesus I might regard it
differently."

There was just sufficient meaning in the latter part of the remark for
his cousin to forbear to reply to it.  He continued to gaze out of the
window and to smoke slowly.

"Not being as rich as Croesus--or you," resumed Carr, regarding him from
beneath lowered lids, "I paddle my own canoe down the stream of Time,
and, tying it to my friends' door-posts, go in to eat their dinners."

"Quite Venetian," said Jem Benson, still looking out of the window.
"It's not a bad thing for you, Wilfred, that you have the doorposts and
dinners--and friends."

Carr grunted in his turn.  "Seriously though, Jem," he said, slowly,
"you're a lucky fellow, a very lucky fellow.  If there is a better girl
above ground than Olive, I should like to see her."

"Yes," said the other, quietly.

"She's such an exceptional girl," continued Carr, staring out of the
window.  "She's so good and gentle.  She thinks you are a bundle of all
the virtues."

He laughed frankly and joyously, but the other man did not join him.
"Strong sense--of right and wrong, though," continued Carr, musingly.
"Do you know, I believe that if she found out that you were not----"

"Not what?" demanded Benson, turning upon him fiercely, "Not what?"

"Everything that you are," returned his cousin, with a grin that belied
his words, "I believe she'd drop you."

"Talk about something else," said Benson, slowly; "your pleasantries are
not always in the best taste."

Wilfred Carr rose and taking a cue from the rack, bent over the board and
practiced one or two favourite shots.  "The only other subject I can talk
about just at present is my own financial affairs," he said slowly, as he
walked round the table.

"Talk about something else," said Benson again, bluntly.

"And the two things are connected," said Carr, and dropping his cue he
half sat on the table and eyed his cousin.

There was a long silence.  Benson pitched the end of his cigar out of the
window, and leaning back closed his eyes.

"Do you follow me?"  inquired Carr at length.

Benson opened his eyes and nodded at the window.

"Do you want to follow my cigar?"  he demanded.

"I should prefer to depart by the usual way for your sake," returned the
other, unabashed.  "If I left by the window all sorts of questions would
be asked, and you know what a talkative chap I am."

"So long as you don't talk about my affairs," returned the other,
restraining himself by an obvious effort, "you can talk yourself hoarse."

"I'm in a mess," said Carr, slowly, "a devil of a mess.  If I don't raise
fifteen hundred by this day fortnight, I may be getting my board and
lodging free."

"Would that be any change?"  questioned Benson.

"The quality would," retorted the other.  "The address also would not be
good.  Seriously, Jem, will you let me have the fifteen hundred?"

"No," said the other, simply.

Carr went white.  "It's to save me from ruin," he said, thickly.

"I've helped you till I'm tired," said Benson, turning and regarding him,
"and it is all to no good.  If you've got into a mess, get out of it.
You should not be so fond of giving autographs away."

"It's foolish, I admit," said Carr, deliberately.  "I won't do so any
more.  By the way, I've got some to sell.  You needn't sneer.  They're
not my own."

"Whose are they?"  inquired the other.

"Yours."

Benson got up from his chair and crossed over to him.  "What is this?"
he asked, quietly.  "Blackmail?"

"Call it what you like," said Carr.  "I've got some letters for sale,
price fifteen hundred.  And I know a man who would buy them at that price
for the mere chance of getting Olive from you.  I'll give you first
offer."

"If you have got any letters bearing my signature, you will be good
enough to give them to me," said Benson, very slowly.

"They're mine," said Carr, lightly; "given to me by the lady you wrote
them to.  I must say that they are not all in the best possible taste."

His cousin reached forward suddenly, and catching him by the collar of
his coat pinned him down on the table.

"Give me those letters," he breathed, sticking his face close to Carr's.

"They're not here," said Carr, struggling.  "I'm not a fool.  Let me go,
or I'll raise the price."

The other man raised him from the table in his powerful hands, apparently
with the intention of dashing his head against it.  Then suddenly his
hold relaxed as an astonished-looking maid-servant entered the room with
letters.  Carr sat up hastily.

"That's how it was done," said Benson, for the girl's benefit as he took
the letters.

"I don't wonder at the other man making him pay for it, then," said Carr,
blandly.

"You will give me those letters?"  said Benson, suggestively, as the girl
left the room.

"At the price I mentioned, yes," said Carr; "but so sure as I am a living
man, if you lay your clumsy hands on me again, I'll double it.  Now, I'll
leave you for a time while you think it over."

He took a cigar from the box and lighting it carefully quitted the room.
His cousin waited until the door had closed behind him, and then turning
to the window sat there in a fit of fury as silent as it was terrible.

The air was fresh and sweet from the park, heavy with the scent of
new-mown grass.  The fragrance of a cigar was now added to it, and
glancing out he saw his cousin pacing slowly by.  He rose and went to the
door, and then, apparently altering his mind, he returned to the window
and watched the figure of his cousin as it moved slowly away into the
moonlight.  Then he rose again, and, for a long time, the room was empty.

                     *   *   *   *   *

It was empty when Mrs. Benson came in some time later to say good-night
to her son on her way to bed.  She walked slowly round the table, and
pausing at the window gazed from it in idle thought, until she saw the
figure of her son advancing with rapid strides toward the house.  He
looked up at the window.

"Good-night," said she.

"Good-night," said Benson, in a deep voice.

"Where is Wilfred?"

"Oh, he has gone," said Benson.

"Gone?"

"We had a few words; he was wanting money again, and I gave him a piece
of my mind.  I don't think we shall see him again."

"Poor Wilfred!"  sighed Mrs. Benson.  "He is always in trouble of some
sort.  I hope that you were not too hard upon him."

"No more than he deserved," said her son, sternly.  "Good night."


II.

The well, which had long ago fallen into disuse, was almost hidden by the
thick tangle of undergrowth which ran riot at that corner of the old
park.  It was partly covered by the shrunken half of a lid, above which a
rusty windlass creaked in company with the music of the pines when the
wind blew strongly.  The full light of the sun never reached it, and the
ground surrounding it was moist and green when other parts of the park
were gaping with the heat.

Two people walking slowly round the park in the fragrant stillness of a
summer evening strayed in the direction of the well.

"No use going through this wilderness, Olive," said Benson, pausing on
the outskirts of the pines and eyeing with some disfavour the gloom
beyond.

"Best part of the park," said the girl briskly; "you know it's my
favourite spot."

"I know you're very fond of sitting on the coping," said the man slowly,
"and I wish you wouldn't.  One day you will lean back too far and fall
in."

"And make the acquaintance of Truth," said Olive lightly.  "Come along."

She ran from him and was lost in the shadow of the pines, the bracken
crackling beneath her feet as she ran.  Her companion followed slowly,
and emerging from the gloom saw her poised daintily on the edge of the
well with her feet hidden in the rank grass and nettles which surrounded
it.  She motioned her companion to take a seat by her side, and smiled
softly as she felt a strong arm passed about her waist.

"I like this place," said she, breaking a long silence, "it is so dismal
--so uncanny.  Do you know I wouldn't dare to sit here alone, Jem.  I
should imagine that all sorts of dreadful things were hidden behind the
bushes and trees, waiting to spring out on me.  Ugh!"

"You'd better let me take you in," said her companion tenderly; "the well
isn't always wholesome, especially in the hot weather.

"Let's make a move."

The girl gave an obstinate little shake, and settled herself more
securely on her seat.

"Smoke your cigar in peace," she said quietly.  "I am settled here for a
quiet talk.  Has anything been heard of Wilfred yet?"

"Nothing."

"Quite a dramatic disappearance, isn't it?"  she continued.  "Another
scrape, I suppose, and another letter for you in the same old strain;
'Dear Jem, help me out.'"

Jem Benson blew a cloud of fragrant smoke into the air, and holding his
cigar between his teeth brushed away the ash from his coat sleeves.

"I wonder what he would have done without you," said the girl, pressing
his arm affectionately.  "Gone under long ago, I suppose.  When we are
married, Jem, I shall presume upon the relationship to lecture him.  He
is very wild, but he has his good points, poor fellow."

"I never saw them," said Benson, with startling bitterness.  "God knows I
never saw them."

"He is nobody's enemy but his own," said the girl, startled by this
outburst.

"You don't know much about him," said the other, sharply.  "He was not
above blackmail; not above ruining the life of a friend to do himself a
benefit.  A loafer, a cur, and a liar!"

The girl looked up at him soberly but timidly and took his arm without a
word, and they both sat silent while evening deepened into night and the
beams of the moon, filtering through the branches, surrounded them with a
silver network.  Her head sank upon his shoulder, till suddenly with a
sharp cry she sprang to her feet.

"What was that?"  she cried breathlessly.

"What was what?"  demanded Benson, springing up and clutching her fast by
the arm.

She caught her breath and tried to laugh.

"You're hurting me, Jem."

His hold relaxed.

"What is the matter?"  he asked gently.

"What was it startled you?"

"I was startled," she said, slowly, putting her hands on his shoulder.
"I suppose the words I used just now are ringing in my ears, but I
fancied that somebody behind us whispered 'Jem, help me out.'"

"Fancy," repeated Benson, and his voice shook; "but these fancies are not
good for you.  You--are frightened--at the dark and the gloom of these
trees.  Let me take you back to the house."

"No, I'm not frightened," said the girl, reseating herself.  "I should
never be really frightened of anything when you were with me, Jem.  I'm
surprised at myself for being so silly."

The man made no reply but stood, a strong, dark figure, a yard or two
from the well, as though waiting for her to join him.

"Come and sit down, sir," cried Olive, patting the brickwork with her
small, white hand, "one would think that you did not like your company."

He obeyed slowly and took a seat by her side, drawing so hard at his
cigar that the light of it shone upon his fare at every breath.  He
passed his arm, firm and rigid as steel, behind her, with his hand
resting on the brickwork beyond.

"Are you warm enough?"  he asked tenderly, as she made a little movement.
"Pretty fair," she shivered; "one oughtn't to be cold at this time of the
year, but there's a cold, damp air comes up from the well."

As she spoke a faint splash sounded from the depths below, and for the
second time that evening, she sprang from the well with a little cry of
dismay.

"What is it now?"  he asked in a fearful voice.  He stood by her side and
gazed at the well, as though half expecting to see the cause of her alarm
emerge from it.

"Oh, my bracelet," she cried in distress, "my poor mother's bracelet.
I've dropped it down the well."

"Your bracelet!"  repeated Benson, dully.  "Your bracelet?  The diamond
one?"

"The one that was my mother's," said Olive.  "Oh, we can get it back
surely.  We must have the water drained off."

"Your bracelet!"  repeated Benson, stupidly.

"Jem," said the girl in terrified tones, "dear Jem, what is the matter?"

For the man she loved was standing regarding her with horror.  The moon
which touched it was not responsible for all the whiteness of the
distorted face, and she shrank back in fear to the edge of the well.  He
saw her fear and by a mighty effort regained his composure and took her
hand.

"Poor little girl," he murmured, "you frightened me.  I was not looking
when you cried, and I thought that you were slipping from my arms,
down--down--"

His voice broke, and the girl throwing herself into his arms clung to him
convulsively.

"There, there," said Benson, fondly, "don't cry, don't cry."

"To-morrow," said Olive, half-laughing, half-crying, "we will all come
round the well with hook and line and fish for it.  It will be quite a
new sport."

"No, we must try some other way," said Benson.  "You shall have it back."

"How?"  asked the girl.

"You shall see," said Benson.  "To-morrow morning at latest you shall
have it back.  Till then promise me that you will not mention your loss
to anyone.  Promise."

"I promise," said Olive, wonderingly.  "But why not?"

"It is of great value, for one thing, and--But there--there are many
reasons.  For one thing it is my duty to get it for you."

"Wouldn't you like to jump down for it?" she asked mischievously.
"Listen."

She stooped for a stone and dropped it down.

"Fancy being where that is now," she said, peering into the blackness;
"fancy going round and round like a mouse in a pail, clutching at the
slimy sides, with the water filling your mouth, and looking up to the
little patch of sky above."

"You had better come in," said Benson, very quietly.  "You are developing
a taste for the morbid and horrible."

The girl turned, and taking his arm walked slowly in the direction of the
house; Mrs. Benson, who was sitting in the porch, rose to receive them.

"You shouldn't have kept her out so long," she said chidingly.  "Where
have you been?"

"Sitting on the well," said Olive, smiling, "discussing our future."

"I don't believe that place is healthy," said Mrs. Benson, emphatically.
"I really think it might be filled in, Jem."

"All right," said her son, slowly.  "Pity it wasn't filled in long ago."

He took the chair vacated by his mother as she entered the house with
Olive, and with his hands hanging limply over the sides sat in deep
thought.  After a time he rose, and going upstairs to a room which was
set apart for sporting requisites selected a sea fishing line and some
hooks and stole softly downstairs again.  He walked swiftly across the
park in the direction of the well, turning before he entered the shadow
of the trees to look back at the lighted windows of the house.  Then
having arranged his line he sat on the edge of the well and cautiously
lowered it.

He sat with his lips compressed, occasionally looking about him in a
startled fashion, as though he half expected to see something peering at
him from the belt of trees.  Time after time he lowered his line until at
length in pulling it up he heard a little metallic tinkle against the
side of the well.

He held his breath then, and forgetting his fears drew the line in inch
by inch, so as not to lose its precious burden.  His pulse beat rapidly,
and his eyes were bright.  As the line came slowly in he saw the catch
hanging to the hook, and with a steady hand drew the last few feet in.
Then he saw that instead of the bracelet he had hooked a bunch of keys.

With a faint cry he shook them from the hook into the water below, and
stood breathing heavily.  Not a sound broke the stillness of the night.
He walked up and down a bit and stretched his great muscles; then he came
back to the well and resumed his task.

For an hour or more the line was lowered without result.  In his
eagerness he forgot his fears, and with eyes bent down the well fished
slowly and carefully.  Twice the hook became entangled in something, and
was with difficulty released.  It caught a third time, and all his
efforts failed' to free it.  Then he dropped the line down the well,
and with head bent walked toward the house.

He went first to the stables at the rear, and then retiring to his room
for some time paced restlessly up and down.  Then without removing his
clothes he flung himself upon the bed and fell into a troubled sleep.


III.

Long before anybody else was astir he arose and stole softly downstairs.
The sunlight was stealing in at every crevice, and flashing in long
streaks across the darkened rooms.  The dining-room into which he looked
struck chill and cheerless in the dark yellow light which came through
the lowered blinds.  He remembered that it had the same appearance when
his father lay dead in the house; now, as then, everything seemed ghastly
and unreal; the very chairs standing as their occupants had left them the
night before seemed to be indulging in some dark communication of ideas.

Slowly and noiselessly he opened the hall door and passed into the
fragrant air beyond.  The sun was shining on the drenched grass and
trees, and a slowly vanishing white mist rolled like smoke about the
grounds.  For a moment he stood, breathing deeply the sweet air of the
morning, and then walked slowly in the direction of the stables.

The rusty creaking of a pump-handle and a spatter of water upon the
red-tiled courtyard showed that somebody else was astir, and a few steps
farther he beheld a brawny, sandy-haired man gasping wildly under severe
self-infliction at the pump.

"Everything ready, George?"  he asked quietly.

"Yes, sir," said the man, straightening up suddenly and touching his
forehead.  "Bob's just finishing the arrangements inside.  It's a lovely
morning for a dip.  The water in that well must be just icy."

"Be as quick as you can," said Benson, impatiently.

"Very good, sir," said George, burnishing his face harshly with a very
small towel which had been hanging over the top of the pump.  "Hurry up,
Bob."

In answer to his summons a man appeared at the door of the stable with a
coil of stout rope over his arm and a large metal candlestick in his
hand.

"Just to try the air, sir," said George, following his master's glance,
"a well gets rather foul sometimes, but if a candle can live down it, a
man can."

His master nodded, and the man, hastily pulling up the neck of his shirt
and thrusting his arms into his coat, followed him as he led the way
slowly to the well.

"Beg pardon, sir," said George, drawing up to his side, "but you are not
looking over and above well this morning.  If you'll let me go down I'd
enjoy the bath."

"No, no," said Benson, peremptorily.

"You ain't fit to go down, sir," persisted his follower.  "I've never
seen you look so before.  Now if--"

"Mind your business," said his master curtly.

George became silent and the three walked with swinging strides through
the long wet grass to the well.  Bob flung the rope on the ground and at
a sign from his master handed him the candlestick.

"Here's the line for it, sir," said Bob, fumbling in his pockets.

Benson took it from him and slowly tied it to the candlestick.  Then he
placed it on the edge of the well, and striking a match, lit the candle
and began slowly to lower it.

"Hold hard, sir," said George, quickly, laying his hand on his arm, "you
must tilt it or the string'll burn through."

Even as he spoke the string parted and the candlestick fell into the
water below.

Benson swore quietly.

"I'll soon get another," said George, starting up.

"Never mind, the well's all right," said Benson.

"It won't take a moment, sir," said the other over his shoulder.

"Are you master here, or am I?"  said Benson hoarsely.

George came back slowly, a glance at his master's face stopping the
protest upon his tongue, and he stood by watching him sulkily as he sat
on the well and removed his outer garments.  Both men watched him
curiously, as having completed his preparations he stood grim and silent
with his hands by his sides.

"I wish you'd let me go, sir," said George, plucking up courage to
address him.  "You ain't fit to go, you've got a chill or something.  I
shouldn't wonder it's the typhoid.  They've got it in the village bad."

For a moment Benson looked at him angrily, then his gaze softened.  "Not
this time, George," he said, quietly.  He took the looped end of the rope
and placed it under his arms, and sitting down threw one leg over the
side of the well.

"How are you going about it, sir?"  queried George, laying hold of the
rope and signing to Bob to do the same.

"I'll call out when I reach the water," said Benson; "then pay out three
yards more quickly so that I can get to the bottom."

"Very good, sir," answered both.

Their master threw the other leg over the coping and sat motionless.  His
back was turned toward the men as he sat with head bent, looking down the
shaft.  He sat for so long that George became uneasy.

"All right, sir?"  he inquired.

"Yes," said Benson, slowly.  "If I tug at the rope, George, pull up at
once.  Lower away."

The rope passed steadily through their hands until a hollow cry from the
darkness below and a faint splashing warned them that he had reached the
water.  They gave him three yards more and stood with relaxed grasp and
strained ears, waiting.

"He's gone under," said Bob in a low voice.

The other nodded, and moistening his huge palms took a firmer grip of the
rope.

Fully a minute passed, and the men began to exchange uneasy glances.
Then a sudden tremendous jerk followed by a series of feebler ones nearly
tore the rope from their grasp.

"Pull!"  shouted George, placing one foot on the side and hauling
desperately.  "Pull! pull!  He's stuck fast; he's not coming; PULL!"

In response to their terrific exertions the rope came slowly in, inch by
inch, until at length a violent splashing was heard, and at the same
moment a scream of unutterable horror came echoing up the shaft.

"What a weight he is !"  panted Bob.  "He's stuck fast or something.
Keep still, sir; for heaven's sake, keep still."

For the taut rope was being jerked violently by the struggles of the
weight at the end of it.  Both men with grunts and sighs hauled it in
foot by foot.

"All right, sir," cried George, cheerfully.

He had one foot against the well, and was pulling manfully; the burden
was nearing the top.  A long pull and a strong pull, and the face of a
dead man with mud in the eyes and nostrils came peering over the edge.
Behind it was the ghastly face of his master; but this he saw too late,
for with a great cry he let go his hold of the rope and stepped back.
The suddenness overthrew his assistant, and the rope tore through his
hands.  There was a frightful splash.

"You fool!"  stammered Bob, and ran to the well helplessly.

"Run!" cried George.  "Run for another line."

He bent over the coping and called eagerly down as his assistant sped
back to the stables shouting wildly.  His voice re-echoed down the shaft,
but all else was silence.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Well, by W.W. Jacobs

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WELL ***

***** This file should be named 12124.txt or 12124.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/2/1/2/12124/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


