The Project Gutenberg EBook of Transactions of the American Society of
Civil Engineers, Vol. LXVIII, Sept. 1910, by E. B. Temple

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Transactions of the American Society of Civil Engineers, Vol. LXVIII, Sept. 1910
       The New York Tunnel Extension of the Pennsylvania Railroad.
       Meadows Division and Harrison Transfer Yard. Paper No. 1153

Author: E. B. Temple

Release Date: March 18, 2006 [EBook #18012]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TRANSACTIONS OF THE AMERICAN ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Sigal Alon and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net











AMERICAN SOCIETY OF CIVIL ENGINEERS

INSTITUTED 1852


TRANSACTIONS

Paper No. 1153


THE NEW YORK TUNNEL EXTENSION OF THE
PENNSYLVANIA RAILROAD.

MEADOWS DIVISION AND HARRISON TRANSFER
YARD.[A]

BY E. B. TEMPLE, M. AM. SOC. C. E.



The New York Tunnel Extension of the Pennsylvania Railroad diverges from
the New York Division in the Town of Harrison, N. J., and, ascending on
a 0.5% grade, crosses over the tracks of the New York Division and the
main line of the Delaware, Lackawanna and Western Railroad. Thence it
continues, with light undulating grades, across the Hackensack Meadows
to a point just east of the Northern Railroad of New Jersey and the New
York, Susquehanna and Western Railroad, where it descends to the tunnels
under Bergen Hill and the North River. (Plate XVI.)

[Illustration: PLATE XVI.--Plan and Profile of the Pennsylvania Tunnel &
Terminal R. R., from Harrison, N. J., to the Hudson River]

That portion of the line lying west of the portals of the Bergen Hill
Tunnels has been divided into two sections: First, the most westerly,
known as the Harrison Transfer Station and Yard (Plate XVII), which is
located on the southern side of the New York Division, Pennsylvania
Railroad, and extends from the connection with the New York Division
tracks at grade up to the point of crossing the same, where the
Pennsylvania Tunnel and Terminal Railroad has its beginning; second, the
Meadows Division of the Pennsylvania Tunnel and Terminal Railroad, which
is a double-track railroad, 5.08 miles long, extending from a point just
west of the bridge over the New York Division to a point 300 ft. west of
the western portals of the Bergen Hill Tunnels.

_Harrison Transfer Station and Yard._--The necessities for the Harrison
improvements are two-fold: First, as a place to change motive power from
steam to electric, and _vice versa_; second, as a transfer for
passengers from trains destined to the new Station at Seventh Avenue and
33d Street, New York City, to steam or rapid transit trains destined to
the present Jersey City Station, or to the lower part of New York City
_via_ the Hudson and Manhattan Tunnels, and _vice versa_.

All steam trains from Philadelphia, the South, and the West, from New
Jersey seashore resorts, and local trains on the New York Division bound
for the new Pennsylvania Station, will change their motive power from
steam to electric engines at the Harrison Transfer Station. Likewise,
all trains from the Tunnel Line will change from electric to steam
motive power there, and passengers coming from Jersey City and the
southern section of New York City can take through trains at the
Harrison Transfer platforms. It is estimated that the time required to
make this change of motive power, or to transfer passengers, will not
exceed 3-1/2 min.

The plan at Harrison provides at present for two platforms, each 1,100
ft. long and 28 ft. wide, and having ample shelters and waiting rooms,
connected by a 12-ft. tunnel under the tracks, provision being made for
two additional platforms when necessity requires their construction. The
platforms are supported on walls of reinforced concrete, with an
overhang to provide a refuge for employees from passing trains. The
concrete walls are supported on wooden piles, prevented from spreading
by 7/8-in. tie-rods at 10-ft. intervals, and embedded in concrete under
the paving of the platform. As the elevation of the top of the platform
is +21.83, and the top of the piles is +14.54 above mean tide, the piles
will, of course, decay; but, as the embankment has been completed for
some time and is well packed and settled, the concrete being deposited
directly on the embankment, very little trouble from settlement is
anticipated when the piles decay. The surface of the platforms, with the
exception of the edges, is to be of brick, on a concrete base; and, if
settlement occurs, the bricks can be taken up and re-surfaced. The tops
of the platforms are 3 ft. 10 in. above the top of the rail and on a
level with the floors of the cars, so that passengers may enter or leave
trains without using steps, as all cars which will enter the
Pennsylvania Station, New York City, are to be provided with vestibules
having trap-doors in the floor to give access to either high or low
platforms. Details of the platforms are shown on Plates XVIII and XIX.

As planned at present, there will be four main running tracks, one
adjacent to each side of the two platforms, providing standing room for
four of the longest trains, two in each direction, or double the number
of trains of ordinary length, so that passengers having to transfer from
a train destined to the Pennsylvania Station at 33d Street to a train
destined for the Jersey City Station or the Hudson and Manhattan Tunnels
will merely cross the platform. Between the two interior main tracks are
two shifting tracks, so that between the platforms there will be two
passenger tracks on which trains will stop to change motive power and
transfer passengers, and two shifting tracks for rapid despatching of
the empty engines and motors, each of the four tracks being 15 ft. from
center to center to allow for uncoupling and inspection of cars.

An efficient system of connections and cross-overs is provided for all
tracks, and there is ample storage capacity for 10 steam engines at the
western end of the platforms and 20 electric motors at the eastern end,
both of which are conveniently located for quick movement, with
provision for additional storage tracks, if required. Steam engines,
upon being disconnected, can be quickly sent to the main engine storage
yard, and by the use of a loop track no turntable is required. The main
engine storage yard is located south of the running tracks adjoining the
bulkhead along the Passaic River, where provision is made for the
storage of 20 engines. There are two 50,000-gal. water tanks, an
ash-pit, inspection-pit, work-pit, sand-hopper, and the necessary
buildings. Water is brought from the city water main in the Meadows
Yard, on the New York Division, about 8,200 ft. eastward from the center
of this yard.

It was at first planned to locate a power-house and car and engine
repair shops in the yard, but as the ultimate extent of the
electrification of the New York Division cannot now be determined, the
facilities in the large power-house in Long Island City, and in the shop
and round-house in the Meadows Yard of the New York Division, were
increased to provide for the power and repairs necessary for the next
few years. In order to reach the Meadows shops and round-house without
interfering with the present passenger and freight tracks, it was
necessary to build track connections with the Meadows Yard. Twelve
stalls of the existing round-house were extended to accommodate the
motive power; a large transfer table and pit were increased in size, and
an additional ash-pit and engine storage tracks were constructed.

Any extensive repairs to the electric engines will be made for the
present in the Jamaica Shops, Long Island; and the large shops at
Trenton, on the New York Division, as well as the Meadows Shops, will be
available for repairs to the steam locomotives. There is ample room at
Harrison, and plans have been prepared providing for storage and light
repair of cars, locomotives, electric motors, and rapid transit trains,
if the future demands require such construction at this place.

The rapid transit line will extend from Park Place, Newark, to Harrison,
and thence over the present line of the Pennsylvania Railroad, which
will be electrified, to a junction with the Hudson and Manhattan
Railroad Company's tunnel tracks at Prior Street, Jersey City. It will
be constructed and owned by the Pennsylvania Railroad Company. A joint
and frequent through service will be conducted by both companies between
Park Place, Newark, and the terminal of the Hudson and Manhattan
Railroad, in New York City, by the use of multiple-unit trains similar
to those now being operated in the Hudson and Manhattan tunnels. These
trains will pick up and discharge Pennsylvania Railroad passengers at
the Harrison Transfer Station, so that all passengers bound for lower
New York City, who desire to use the tunnel service, will make the
change at Harrison instead of at Jersey City as at present. Provision is
made for two additional platforms, each 1,100 ft. long, to accommodate
the rapid transit trains when the present platforms prove inadequate.
The existing passenger tracks between the Harrison Transfer Yard and
Summit Avenue, Jersey City, where a new local passenger station will be
constructed, will be used jointly by steam and electric trains.

The embankment for the Harrison Yard was made, under contract dated July
21st, 1906, with Henry Steers, Incorporated, of New York City, of cellar
earth from New York City, and with rock and earth excavated from the
Pennsylvania Station and cross-town tunnels. It was necessary to
construct 1,000 ft. of stone and crib bulkhead along the bank of the
Passaic River. The plan of the yard was prepared by a committee of
operating, electrical, and engineering officers, consisting of Mr. F. L.
Sheppard, General Superintendent, New Jersey Division, Pennsylvania
Railroad Company; George Gibbs, M. Am. Soc. C. E., Chief Engineer,
Electric Traction and Terminal Station Construction, Pennsylvania Tunnel
and Terminal Railroad Company; Mr. J. A. McCrea, General Superintendent,
Long Island Railroad Company; Mr. C. S. Krick, Superintendent,
Pennsylvania Tunnel and Terminal Railroad Company; Mr. A. M. Parker,
then Principal Assistant Engineer, New Jersey Division, Pennsylvania
Railroad Company, now Superintendent, Hudson Division; and approved by
Mr. A. C. Shand, Chief Engineer, Pennsylvania Railroad Company, and
Chief Engineer, Meadows Division, Pennsylvania Tunnel and Terminal
Railroad Company.

[Illustration: PLATE XVII.--Plan of Harrison Yard]

_Meadows Division, Pennsylvania Tunnel and Terminal Railroad._--The two
main tracks ascending through the Harrison Yard continue on an
embankment to a point 500 ft. west of the west abutment of the bridge
over the New York Division tracks, which is the point of beginning of
the Pennsylvania Tunnel and Terminal Railroad. From this point the line
extends in a general northeasterly direction, crossing the Hackensack
River, skirting the base of Snake Hill, and thence to the approach cut
to Bergen Hill Tunnels. The embankment varies in height from 25 to 30
ft. above the surface of the meadows.

In this Division the following bridges were necessary:

     Pennsylvania Railroad, New York Division, Passenger and Newark
     Freight Tracks;

     Delaware, Lackawanna and Western Railroad, Morris and Essex
     Division;

     Newark and Jersey City Turnpike;

     Public Service Corporation Right of Way;

     Erie Railroad, Newark and Paterson Branch;

     Belleville Road, and Jersey City Water Company's Pipe Line;

     Greenwood Lake Railroad (Erie Railroad), Arlington Branch;

     Hackensack River;

     Greenwood Lake Railroad (Erie Railroad), Reconstructed Line;

     Delaware, Lackawanna and Western Railroad, Boonton Branch;

     Erie Railroad, Passenger Tracks;

     Bridge of 11 spans over proposed yard tracks, Erie Railroad;

     County Road;

     Secaucus Road;

     New York, Susquehanna and Western Railroad;

     Northern Railroad of New Jersey.

The alignment for this distance consists of 3.57 miles of tangent and
three curves, two of which are 0 deg. 30' each, one of the latter being at
the western end of the Division, and the other adjoining Snake Hill; the
third is a regular curve of 1 deg. 54' on the east-bound track, and a
compound curve with a maximum of 2 deg. on the west-bound track, the
variation being due to the track spacing of 37 ft. from center to center
in the Bergen Hill Tunnels, while on the Meadows Division it is 13 ft.
from center to center.

The profile was adopted to give 18 ft. of clearance from the under side
of the bridges to the top of the rail of the Erie Railroad branches, 21
ft. to the top of the rail of its main line, 19 ft. to the top of the
rail of the Delaware, Lackawanna and Western Railroad, and a clearance
of 24 ft. above high water in the Hackensack River. With the exception
of that portion of the line adjoining the Bergen Hill Tunnels, where it
was necessary to continue the 1.3% grade up to the bridge over the
Northern Railroad of New Jersey, and the east-bound ascending grade of
0.5% from the Harrison platforms to the bridge over the New York
Division tracks, the grades do not exceed 0.3 per cent.

When the construction of the embankment was commenced, it was expected
that there would be considerable trouble by settlement due to the
displacement of the soft material underlying the surface of the meadows
to a depth of from 10 to 15 ft.; but, with the exception of the trouble
the contractors had in maintaining their temporary trestles, the
embankment as completed has settled very little. The section east of the
Hackensack River was made, in great part, of rock excavated from a
borrow-pit in the Town of Secaucus, north of the eastern end of the
Division. The embankment was built under two contracts, one for the work
east of the crossing of the Boonton Branch of the Delaware, Lackawanna
and Western Railroad, under contract dated January 15th, 1907, with
H. S. Kerbaugh, Incorporated, the material being taken from the
borrow-pit in narrow-gauge cars and dumped from a strong pile trestle
along the total length of the section, the same being completed in 19
months; the other for the embankment west of the Boonton Branch,
Delaware, Lackawanna and Western Railroad, under contract dated April
10th, 1906, with Henry Steers, Incorporated, of New York City, the
material, consisting partly of cellar earth, and partly of rock and
earth excavated from other sections of the Pennsylvania Tunnel and
Terminal Railroad, being brought on scows up the Hackensack and Passaic
Rivers from New York City. The material was handled expeditiously from
the scows by orange-peel buckets operated from the shore, deposited in
standard-gauge dump-cars, and transported by locomotives at one time
used on the elevated railroads in New York City. No excavation whatever
was required on the Meadows Division or in the Harrison Yard.

[Illustration: PLATE XVIII.--Details of Shelters and Platforms, Harrison
Transfer Station.]

[Illustration: PLATE XIX.--Details of Shelters and Platforms, Harrison
Transfer Station.]

The substructures for all the bridges, except the Hackensack River
Draw-bridge, are of concrete, without reinforcement, heavy enough to
withstand the ordinary earth pressure for the exposed height. With the
exception of three bridges, foundations were built on clay and sand;
these three, on account of excessive depth of soft material, were built
on piles. In some cases loose stone was deposited back of the
foundations for a width of 10 or 12 ft. after the mud had been removed.
This precaution has prevented trouble due to the thrust of the high
embankments on the saturated material. Masonry for all these bridges was
constructed under contract dated August 21st, 1905, with McMullen and
McDermott, of New York City. The superstructure consisted principally of
half-through girders, floor of I-beams, filled solid with concrete, on
top of which were placed five layers of Hydrex felt, and water-proofing
compound, protected by a layer of sand and grouted brick from the stone
ballast.

The bridges over the New York Division passenger and Newark freight
tracks of the Pennsylvania Railroad, and the main-line tracks of the
Delaware, Lackawanna and Western Railroad, at the west end of the
Meadows Division, are separated by 300 ft. of embankment. The skew angle
is 9 deg., the total length of each bridge being about 450 ft. The floors
consist of I-beams embedded in concrete.

The Hackensack River Draw-bridge consists of six spans of deck plate
girders, each 110 ft. long, and a draw-span 300 ft. long, operated by
two 70-h.p. electric motors. The masonry was constructed under contract
dated August 25th, 1905, with the Drake and Stratton Company, of
Philadelphia; and the steelwork was furnished and erected by the
Pennsylvania Steel Company, of Steelton, Pa. An important and
interesting feature of the draw-bridge is the lift rail, and new
rail-locking device. Mitered rails are used, with sufficient opening
between the ends to prevent binding at times of expansion. It was deemed
advisable that the mitered joint should occur on the abutment, or fixed
span, instead of at the opening at the end of the draw. The lift rail,
therefore, was a necessity; and the design, as shown on Plate XX, was
perfected. It consists of lift-rails, 8 ft. 4 in. long, moving
vertically 8 in. at the free end, reinforced on both sides by sliding
steel castings, which are lifted with the rail; when the latter is
dropped in place, the wedges on the castings engage at the abutment and
heel joints and at one intermediate point in dove-tailed wedge seats,
insuring tight contact with the rail, and absolute fastening to the deck
of the bridge. The objection to the ordinary lift-rail, which in
lowering must make its own joint by seating in tight boxes, has been
that any slight deviation from a true line would prevent the rail from
seating itself properly. This objection has been entirely overcome in
this design, by allowing liberal clearance on all seats, and securing
rigidity by the sliding bars and wedges which are connected with the
inter-locking system, so that it is impossible for a clear signal to be
given unless the lift-rails and wedges are in their proper positions.
This device has been operated successfully on the New York and Long
Branch Railroad bridge over Raritan Bay for the last 18 months.

Each of the two main tracks on the Meadows Division, and all the main
tracks in the Harrison Transfer Yard, are of standard construction, with
Pennsylvania Section, 1909, 100-lb., open-hearth steel rails, and stone
ballast. Every fifth tie is made 9 ft. 5 in. long, to carry the third
rail for the electric current, and all joints of the running rails are
bonded for the same purpose. Track-laying on the Meadows, and in
Harrison Transfer Yard, has been done under contract dated April 26th,
1909, with Henry Steers, Incorporated, of New York City.

Samuel Rea, M. Am. Soc. C. E., Second Vice-President, Pennsylvania
Railroad Company, is the executive officer under whose direction the
work has been carried on. Mr. William H. Brown, Chief Engineer,
Pennsylvania Railroad Company, and Chief Engineer of the Meadows
Division, also a Member of the Board of Consulting Engineers for the
tunnel extension, until his retirement by age limit on February 28th,
1906, located and started the construction of the line from Harrison to
the western portals of the Bergen Hill Tunnels, which latter point was
the westernmost limit of authority of the Board of Consulting Engineers.
Mr. A. C. Shand succeeded Mr. Brown as Chief Engineer of the
Pennsylvania Railroad Company, and as Chief Engineer of the Meadows
Division, with the writer, who was Assistant Chief Engineer of the
Pennsylvania Railroad Company, and had been closely associated with Mr.
Brown at the time of the location of the line and its earlier period of
construction. H. E. Leonard, M. Am. Soc. C. E., Engineer of Bridges and
Buildings, Pennsylvania Railroad Company, designed the Hackensack River
Bridge, the superstructures of the other bridges, and the rail-locking
device on the Hackensack River Draw-bridge. The surveys and construction
of the Meadows Division and of the Harrison Transfer Yard have been in
charge of Mr. William C. Bowles, Engineer of Construction.

[Illustration: PLATE XX, FIG. 1.--LIFT RAIL AND LOCKING DEVICE, DRAW
PARTLY OPEN.]

[Illustration: PLATE XX, FIG. 2.--LIFT RAIL AND LOCKING DEVICE, DRAW
CLOSED.]

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote A: Presented at the meeting of June 1st, 1910.]






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Transactions of the American Society
of Civil Engineers, Vol. LXVIII, Sept. 1910, by E. B. Temple

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TRANSACTIONS OF THE AMERICAN ***

***** This file should be named 18012.txt or 18012.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/0/1/18012/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Sigal Alon and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

