The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is Going On
In It, Vol. 1, No. 29, May 27, 1897, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Great Round World and What Is Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 29, May 27, 1897
       A Weekly Magazine for Boys and Girls

Author: Various

Release Date: April 11, 2005 [EBook #15601]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD AND ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team (www.pgdp.net)







_FIVE CENTS._

THE GREAT ROUND WORLD
AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT

    SUBSCRIPTION PRICE. MAY 27, 1897  Vol. 1. NO. 29
    $2.50 PER YEAR
    [Entered at Post Office, New York City, as second-class matter]

[Illustration]

    A WEEKLY NEWSPAPER FOR BOYS AND GIRLS

    WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON. PUBLISHER
    NO. 3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST. NEW YORK CITY

=Copyright, 1897, WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON.=

       *       *       *       *       *

    AS A
    =SPECIAL INDUCEMENT=

    for our subscribers to interest others in "The Great Round
    World," we will give to each subscriber who sends us $2.50 to
    pay for a year's subscription to a new name, a copy of

    =Rand, McNally & Co.=
      =1897 Atlas of the World.=

    =160 pages of colored maps from new plates, size 11 1/2 x 14
    inches, printed on special paper with marginal index, and well
    worth its regular price - - - - $2.50.=


Every one has some sort of an atlas, doubtless, but an old atlas is no
better than an old directory; countries do not move away, as do people,
but they do change and our knowledge of them increases, and this atlas,
made in 1897 from =new= plates, is perfect and up to date and covers every
point on

    =The Great Round World.=

Those not subscribers should secure the subscription of a friend and remit
$5 to cover it and their own. A copy of the atlas will be sent to either
address.

       *       *       *       *       *

GREAT ROUND WORLD,

_3 and 5 West 18th Street, . . . . . . . .New York City._

       *       *       *       *       *

=LIBRARIANS=

will please note that the subscription price of THE GREAT ROUND WORLD--to
libraries--is $1.75 per year.

       *       *       *       *       *

=S.T.A. Vertical Writing Pens=

[Illustration]

=PRICES:=

=Per Gross, $1.00; Per Dozen= (samples), =10 Cents=

Vertical writing demands a commercial pen. The "S.T.A." pens are strictly
a commercial pen, made after the famous models designed by John Jackson,
originator of the

    ------_System of Upright Writing._------

The desirability of teaching children, boys especially, to write with such
a pen as they will use in after life will be recognized by every good
teacher.

_Introduced into the Schools of Denver, Colo., and elsewhere._

        *       *       *       *       *

=THE . FIRST . BOUND . VOLUME=

OF

="The Great Round World"=

(Containing Nos. 1 to 15)

IS NOW READY.

    Handsomely bound in strong cloth, with title on side and back.
    Price, postage paid, $1.25. Subscribers may exchange their
    numbers by sending them to us (express paid) with 35 cents to
    cover cost of binding, and 10 cents for return carriage. Address

=_3 and 5 West 18th Street,- - - -New York City._=

       *       *       *       *       *

=PREMIUM LIST=

    In connection with our offer of any BICYCLE you wish for 100 new
    subscriptions, we have prepared a

    =Premium Catalogue=

    This contains a list of selected articles which will be given to
    those who may obtain a smaller number of subscriptions.

       *       *       *       *       *

Those who fail to secure the necessary number for the bicycle may make
selection from this catalogue.

       *       *       *       *       *

    =Copy mailed on receipt of 5c.=

       *       *       *       *       *

    =THE GREAT ROUND WORLD=
    =3 & 5 West 18th St., New York City=

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE GREAT ROUND
WORLD
AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT.]

    VOL. 1   MAY 27, 1897.   NO. 29

       *       *       *       *       *

The settlement of the terms of peace between Turkey and Greece promises to
be a very long and tedious matter.

It has been announced that Turkey offers to conclude peace, provided
Greece pays her $15,000,000 to cover her war expenses, gives her certain
strategic points in Thessaly, and turns over to her the Greek fleet until
the war expenses are paid.

The Sultan has begun the negotiations by asking for everything he could
think of, but this was just what people expected he would do.

England regards Turkey's demands as unfair, and will oppose them. She
thinks that Greece should merely be made to withdraw her troops from
Crete, and give Turkey a reasonable sum of money as war indemnity.

It is a pity that England did not show some of this sympathy sooner,
instead of standing idly by until Turkey had brought Greece to her present
piteous plight.

That Greece should have been so easily beaten is still a cause of
wonderment.

If all accounts are true, the Crown Prince Constantine deserves a good
deal of the blame of the disaster. He was not experienced enough to take
command of an army in an important campaign, and should not have
undertaken so difficult a task unless he was sure of himself.

It is said by all the newspaper correspondents who were with the Greek
army, that the shameful flight from Larissa was the cause of the series of
defeats that followed it. These men declare that after Larissa the Greeks
lost confidence in their commanders, and had no hope of success.

It is claimed that if the Greeks had pushed forward instead of retreating,
the Turks must have been beaten.

Up to the evening of April 23d, when the retreat occurred, the Turks were
in a desperate condition. Edhem Pasha, the general in command of the
Turkish army, had decided that it was impossible to break through the
Greek lines, and had ordered a retreat to Elassona. That very night he
telegraphed the hopelessness of his situation to Constantinople, and a
special messenger left for Athens, bearing a message from the Sultan,
asking for peace.

The retreat on Larissa changed the whole fate of the war.

There are many rumors why this retreat was ordered, but no one seems to
understand the matter clearly.

One report says that the Turks were actually falling back on Elassona, and
one of the Greek generals, seeing the movement, mistook it for an attempt
to surround the Greeks and cut their army to pieces. He is said to have
galloped to the Crown Prince with this mis-information, and assured him
that unless he ordered a retreat they would all be sacrificed. The Crown
Prince did not attempt to assure himself of the accuracy of this
statement, but at once issued the fatal order.

If this account be true, the two armies must have been fleeing from each
other at the same moment.

Edhem Pasha, being a good general, soon discovered what had happened. He
at once saw his opportunity and took advantage of it.

The Greeks, unfortunately, had no general who knew thoroughly the art of
war, and so their mistake was not understood.

In reviewing the short Greek campaign, some interesting comparisons have
been made between the war in Greece and the war in Cuba. The conclusion
arrived at has been that good leaders are the essential for successful
warfare, and that without them the bravest soldiers are of little use.

The army sent by Spain against Cuba was about as large as that sent by
Turkey against Greece, but there were only one-fifth as many Cubans to
fight the Spanish army as there were Greeks to fight the Turks. The
Cubans, moreover, were badly armed, knew little of the trade of
soldiering, and were merely a band of sturdy patriots, fighting with a
determination to conquer or die, while the Greeks were finely equipped
soldiers.

One would have supposed that the Greeks would have given the Turks some
hard fighting, and have been able to make their own terms in the end, and
that the Cubans would have been subdued in very short order.

[Illustration: ATHENS: KING'S PALACE FROM THE GARDENS.]

How different the results have been.

Greece with her splendid army had no leaders worthy of the name, and has
been whipped and shamed in two short weeks of war.

Cuba, in spite of her motley, ill-armed bands of soldiers, is happy in the
possession of some great leaders. Cuba had her Maceo, and has yet her
Gomez and her Garcia.

What have these generals done for her?

For more than two years they have carried on the unequal war. Clever
enough to avoid meeting the Spaniards in any pitched battles, that, if
lost, would ruin their cause, they have succeeded in harassing their foe,
wasting Spain's money, wearing out her patience, and keeping her at bay
until time has made better soldiers of them, drawn more friends to their
cause, and rendered the conditions more equal.

The success of the Cubans can be looked forward to with confidence,
because they are well generaled. The failure of the Greeks was expected
with equal certainty, when it became evident that the Hellenic army had no
leaders.

Poor little Greece!

There is still some fighting going on.

The Turks are pressing on, and will continue to do so until the
negotiations for peace are actually begun. Every Greek town they can
capture, every mile they can advance into Greek territory before peace is
formally asked for, gives the Turk the right of demanding better terms
when the final arrangements are made.

In Thessaly the Sultan's army has occupied Volo and Pharsala, and there is
no doubt that it will soon gain possession of Domokho.

In Epirus the Turks routed the Greeks when they attempted to advance after
the retreat to Arta.

The army is said to be completely discouraged by the frequent defeats, and
sorrow and discontent reign throughout Greece.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Greeks are a very excitable people, and it was only natural to suppose
that when the fortunes of war turned against them, they would seek to
throw the blame for their defeat on their rulers.

Every trouble that has befallen Greece has been laid at the door of King
George and his sons.

There have been wild rumors of making the King give up his throne, and it
was reported that a Russian vessel was moored off the Piraeus to rescue the
Royal Family in case of need.

These stories have not been verified, and probably have little truth in
them. When Greece calms down a little she will learn that her King has
been doing the best he could for his country and his people, and their old
kindly feelings for him will return.

The Royal Family have kept themselves quietly in their palace during the
worries, the Queen and Princesses working unceasingly for the relief of
the sick and wounded.

       *       *       *       *       *

Important news has reached us from Cuba.

Gomez is in Havana Province, and it is said that the Spaniards were
defeated in a battle at Guines, thirty miles from Havana.

The city of Havana is once more in a state of excitement. As usual, the
authorities deny that there are any insurgents in Havana Province, and as
usual the people do not believe a word of their proclamations, and are
terrified lest the city be bombarded by Gomez.

The first news of the nearness of the insurgents was brought by a few
Spaniards who formed part of a garrison at Bermeja, a small town on the
borders of Havana Province.

These men straggled into the city with the information that the Cubans had
seized the town and their little fort. They had all been captured, and had
been brought before the general in command, who proved to be Gomez
himself. All but ten of the prisoners were Cubans who had enlisted in the
Spanish service.

General Gomez freed the Spaniards, but ordered the Cubans to be hanged on
the spot, as traitors to their country.

The Spaniards reported that Gomez had a force of 2,000 men with him, and
that General Carillo was following him with another party of 3,000 more.
In Havana it is expected that an attempt to capture the city will be made
within a few days.

It is said that the Cubans have been concentrating their forces in and
around Havana Province for some time past, and that the troops who served
under General Rivera, some 7,000 men in all, are waiting in Pinar del Rio
until Gomez gives them the signal to join him.

Pinar del Rio is at the west of Havana Province. In Matanzas, at the east
of Havana, more insurgents are said to be gathered. It looks as if the
Cubans were really closing in on Havana for a definite purpose.

Spain is trying to raise a new loan to meet the cost of the wars in Cuba
and the Philippine Islands.

There is a report that the health of General Rivera is failing. It is said
that, for want of proper care, his wounds are not healing, and that he is
suffering a great deal from them.

Senator Morgan's bill for recognizing the belligerency of Cuba has been
debated in the Senate.

No progress has been made with it, however.

Some of the Senators spoke very warmly in its favor, and reminded the
Senate of the time when we, too, were struggling for our liberty, and
needed and obtained the support of other countries.

Other Senators tried to get rid of the bill by sending it to the Committee
on Foreign Relations, which would mean a long delay before it could be
brought to a vote.

The chances are that nothing definite will be done for the present, and
that the Cubans will not receive any help from the United States.

The Navy Department has refused to send any more vessels to patrol the
seas for filibusters.

There are now three ships detailed for that duty, and more have been asked
for.

Mr. Long, the Secretary of the Navy, says that he thinks three are plenty,
that the rainy season is at hand, and very little fighting will be done in
Cuba after it once sets in.

       *       *       *       *       *

The death of the Duke d'Aumale has just been announced.

This gentleman was a personage of very great interest to Europeans.

He was the fourth son of Louis Philippe--the King of France who was
deposed in 1848. The Duke d'Aumale was trained to be a soldier. He loved
his profession, and made great progress in it, winning honors for himself
when but a lad of nineteen.

The French people idolized him, and declared that he would some day be to
France what Wellington was to England.

His father was then King, and the Duke induced the King to send him on
active service, and for six years he was in various campaigns, always
distinguishing himself for his bravery and soldierly qualities.

At the end of this time there was a revolution in France. The King was
deposed, a second republic declared, and the whole Orleans family exiled.

The King and the princes went to England, and purchased some fine property
near London, at a place called Twickenham. Here the Duke lived, devoting
himself to literature and study.

The ungrateful French Government, forgetting the services he had done for
his country, not content with banishing him with the rest of his family,
took from him a famous estate called Chantilly, which had belonged to his
ancestors for centuries.

Despite this treatment the Duke's love for his country never changed.

When the Franco-German war broke out in 1870 he instantly offered his
services to France.

Napoleon III., the same Napoleon who sent Maximilian to Mexico, was then
Emperor of France.

He declined the help of the Duke d'Aumale, fearing to allow any of the
princes of the royal blood to serve in the army, lest they might endeavor
to influence the soldiers to bring about a new revolution.

After the battle of Sedan, when Napoleon was taken prisoner, and France
once more became a republic, the Duke returned to France and took an
active part in the affairs of State, and Chantilly and the greater portion
of his lands were restored to him.

The other Orleans princes also returned to France, and remained there
until 1883, when the Minister of War, following the policy of Napoleon
III., declared it undesirable to have the princes serving in the army.

The Duke's name was struck off the army-roll by that General Boulanger who
made such a stir in France at that time. All the commissions held by the
Orleans princes were cancelled, and the whole family once more banished
from France.

A few weeks after the Duke had left France, the French people were
somewhat ashamed to learn that this man, whom they had twice hounded out
of the country, had returned good for evil, and made a present to the
nation, or rather to the Institute of France, of his beautiful chateau of
Chantilly.

The Institute laid the matter before the Government, and asked that the
decree of exile be revoked.

After some time this was done, and the Duke returned to France to live in
Chantilly, which, by the terms of his gift, he was at liberty to use
during his lifetime.

The Duke was seventy years of age. His death was caused by the news that
the Duchess d'Alencon, a favorite niece of his, had been burnt to death in
a dreadful fire which has just occurred in Paris.

Some charitable ladies organized a bazaar for the benefit of sick women
and children.

The great ladies of France were interested in it, and its opening was one
of the fashionable events in Paris.

One afternoon during the progress of the bazaar, when the place was full
of visitors, and many of the greatest ladies in French society were in the
building, buying and selling, a cry of fire was raised, and it was found
that one of the stalls was in flames.

Unhappily, there was but one exit to the building, and the fire spread so
rapidly that it was impossible for all to escape. A number of the ladies
were burned to death.

All Paris, indeed all Europe, is in mourning because of the disaster, for
there is hardly a noble family in Europe which was not represented at the
bazaar.

The Duchess d'Alencon, one of the unfortunate ladies who perished in the
flames, was not only the niece of the Duke d'Aumale, but the sister of the
Empress of Austria.

This same duchess came near being a queen herself, for at one time she was
betrothed to the King of Bavaria, the same King who first understood and
appreciated Richard Wagner, the famous composer, and encouraged him to
write the wonderful works which have changed the whole history of music.

       *       *       *       *       *

Li Hung Chang has not forgotten us, though he is far away in his own
country.

His regard for General Grant was well known, and when he came to this
country he expressed a wish to visit the tomb of his dead friend.

While paying this visit he said that he would like to show his regard for
the great man in some permanent way.

It was suggested that he should plant a tree on the site of the old tomb,
and he seemed greatly pleased with the idea, but nothing further was said
on the subject at the time.

The other day Mr. Yang Yu received a letter from the Viceroy, asking him
to plant the tree before he left the country.

Mr. Yang Yu is the Chinese Minister who has just been recalled from
Washington, and sent on an important mission to St. Petersburg.

When the Minister received the order from the Viceroy, he sent word to the
Park Commissioners asking them if the matter could be arranged.

It was not possible for Li Hung to send a tree from China, but he wrote
Yang Yu that he would like him to select a tree that was a native of
China.

A tree was obtained which is a native of Japan and China. It is called the
Maidenhair tree, because its leaves resemble those of the Maidenhair fern.

Its botanical name is _Gingko Biloba_.

The tree was partly planted by the gardeners, and then the Chinese
Minister, accompanied by some members of the Grant family, proceeded to
the spot to perform the ceremony in the name of Li Hung Chang.

The Minister threw a few shovelfuls of earth on the roots of the tree, and
then read some words in Chinese from a scroll he carried.

The words were translated by the Secretary, and proved to be:

"This tree is planted at the side of the tomb of General U.S. Grant,
ex-President of the United States of America, for the purpose of
commemorating him, by Li Hung Chang, guardian of the Prince, Grand
Secretary of the State, and Earl of the first order.

                                "YANG YU,
            "Vice-President of the Centre Board.
    "Kwang Hsu, 23d year, fourth moon, seventh day."

This inscription is to be cut in marble, in Chinese and also in English,
and placed near the tomb.

The Mr. Yang Yu who performed the ceremony is the Minister whom the See
Yups came on from San Francisco to visit.

It does not seem as if he were going to be of much use to them, for
instead of returning to China he is to go to St. Petersburg, and he may
not see his Emperor for a very long time.

       *       *       *       *       *

An amusing story comes from Victoria, British Columbia, about the Chinese
special envoy, who has just arrived in New York on his way to London.

When the Canadian Pacific steamer which brought him over from China
arrived in port, it was found that she had two cases of smallpox on board.

The authorities of Victoria at once ordered her to quarantine for
twenty-four days.

The steerage passengers, who were all Chinamen, were taken to the
quarantine station, where the usual process of fumigation and disinfection
took place.

There were, doubtless, many protests and wails from the unfortunate
Celestials, but nobody heeded them, and the work was carried through
without difficulty.

When, however, it came to the other passengers, there was a great
disturbance. The English were furious, threatening terrible things if any
one attempted to fumigate them. A special company of 200 armed men was
consequently detailed to guard the quarantine station, lest the passengers
should attempt to get away before the twenty-four days were over.

All this trouble was as nothing, however, to that which arose when it was
conveyed to His Excellency Chang, Special Envoy from the Emperor of China
to Queen Victoria's Diamond Jubilee, that he needed disinfecting!

Accompanying the Envoy was his suite, which was composed of a number of
Chinamen of high rank. None of these illustrious persons had the slightest
knowledge of Western ways, and they one and all protested that to fumigate
them, or their great Chang, was practically fumigating the Emperor of
China! In their eyes this seemed the most awful crime that mortal could
commit.

His Excellency Chang refused to submit to any such insulting treatment,
and appealed to the Canadian Government, the British Government, and the
Chinese Ministers in London to protect him.

He declared that, rather than submit, he would go back to China without
fulfilling his mission,--a proceeding fraught with considerable danger to
himself, as he stated that the Emperor, his master, might cut off his
head, and the heads of all his suite, for disobedience to his wishes. But
the noble Envoy preferred death to fumigation.

What he imagined fumigation was it is impossible to say, but he warned the
authorities that if they attempted it, the Emperor of China would declare
war on England.

The unfortunate officials did not know what to do, and waited in a great
state of anxiety for orders from the Government.

The story does not say how the matter was arranged, but as His Excellency
is now in New York, and war has not been declared by China, it is to be
supposed that he was not fumigated.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Japanese are a very progressive people.

A generation ago the inhabitants of Japan were not allowed to leave their
country, nor were foreigners permitted to enter it.

Since the war with China Japan has taken a wonderful start; her commerce
and manufactures have greatly increased, and her people have begun to seek
a better market for their labors, and emigrate to foreign countries.

Japan is a densely populated land, and the inhabitants have not been slow
to see that an overcrowded country, where thousands of people are
constantly unemployed, is not a good place to make money in.

Since the Japanese have been permitted to seek their fortunes in other
lands, they have emigrated in vast numbers.

They are now to be found all over the world.

We have spoken about them in Hawaii, but the Sandwich Islanders are not
the only people to protest against them as colonists.

In British Columbia they have arrived in such hordes that the Government
has been considering laws to keep them out in future.

In California there is a strong opposition to them. They are not desired
in Australia, nor in the English colonies in the Pacific Ocean.

With all these countries making laws against them, and Hawaii sending them
back from her shores, it would seem that the thrifty Japanese would have
to stay in their own country. However, a haven has just been offered to
them in Mexico.

A Japanese syndicate has secured 300,000 acres in the Mexican State of
Chiapas, on which a Japanese colony is to be established. The land is to
be divided into lots of 20 acres, one lot to be assigned to each family.

The immigrants are to raise coffee, cotton, tobacco, and sugar, and to
introduce certain Japanese industries.

The first party of colonists are now on their way to Mexico, and it is
thought that thousands will follow them.

The Mexicans are said to be quite pleased with the prospect of the
Japanese settling among them. They need a great many laborers; these they
find it very difficult to obtain, and they expect the new immigrants to be
a great help to them.

It will be interesting to watch how the amiable, active Japanese get along
with the fiery, indolent Mexicans.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hawaii is disturbed over the news that the Japanese cruiser _Naniwa_ is on
its way to Honolulu.

She brings with her a special Japanese Commissioner, who will investigate
the immigration matters, and claim from the Government of the Sandwich
Islands the sum of $100,000 damages for preventing her citizens from
landing.

It is reported that the _Naniwa_ has on board three of the emigrants who
were refused admission, and that she will try and land them, for the
purpose of making the Hawaiian Government prove in the courts its right to
forbid their entry.

The Japanese insist that Hawaii has violated the treaty existing between
Japan and the Sandwich Islands. The Honolulu lawyers have been studying
the treaty, and insist that the immigrants had no legal right to land, and
that the treaty has not been violated.

In the mean while, the Government of Hawaii is doing all in its power to
get white laborers employed instead of Japanese on all the sugar and
coffee plantations. And as it is feared that the United States will not
care to annex the islands if all the labor is done by Asiatics and there
is no room for white men, it is trying to get Americans to go over with
their families, and is promising them steady and paying employment.

An Immigration Bureau has been opened, and every effort will be made to
get first-class American laborers to go there.

       *       *       *       *       *

The revolution in Honduras has been suppressed.

We mentioned this trouble in No. 26 of THE GREAT ROUND WORLD, and said
that her sister republics had declined to interfere.

Matters became so threatening, and the revolution took on such a serious
aspect, that Nicaragua finally decided to help; but she did not move
until Dr. de Soto had been proclaimed President by the rebel party, and
had gained possession of the town of Puerto Cortez.

Finding that the revolution promised to be something more than the usual
South American affair, Great Britain and the United States both ordered
cruisers to Puerto Cortez to protect the interests of their citizens.

Nicaragua at the same time armed a steam-tug, and, loading her with
soldiers, sent her to the little town to recapture it from the insurgents.

This was evidently accomplished, and appears to have ended the revolution.
A telegram has been received in Washington from our American Consul in
Honduras, stating that the revolution is at an end.

There is, however, a very indignant feeling against Nicaragua, in
consequence of a story which has been brought in by the steamer _Rover_.

Captain Reed, of the _Rover_, which is a fruit steamer, declares that when
about four miles out of Puerto Cortez, his vessel, though flying the
American flag, was fired upon by the Nicaraguan gunboat _Lucy B._

The story as told by him is that he reached Puerto Cortez on May 6th, and
knowing the port to be in the hands of the insurgents, he decided not to
anchor, but to cruise about until the customs officers should board him,
and tell him whether it would be safe to land.

He could see that the town was in a state of ferment, and that the
inhabitants were running about from place to place.

After waiting a little while he thought it unsafe to land, and determined
to go to the town of Omoa, where he knew the government forces were in
possession.

He had travelled about four miles from Puerto Cortez when he sighted the
_Lucy B._

He decided to wait for her, and find out from her how matters stood in
Puerto Cortez.

Suddenly, when about half a mile away, the _Lucy B._ fired on the _Rover_.

Captain Reed instantly ordered the engines to be stopped, and brought the
vessel to a standstill; but before the sailors had time to carry out his
orders, another shot was fired at him.

Soon after the vessel was boarded by General Reyes, of the Nicaraguan
government, and six of his followers.

He examined the ship's papers, and though finding them in order, still had
the ship searched from end to end, declaring that the _Rover_ was carrying
arms and ammunition to the rebels in Puerto Cortez.

When his search was over, and nothing had been found, Captain Reed
vigorously protested against the treatment to which he had been subjected,
and pointed to the American flag which was flying at the mast-head.

General Reyes replied that he might protest all he pleased, but he ought
to consider himself lucky that the _Lucy B._ had not sunk his vessel.

The captain of the _Rover_ will enter a protest against the action of the
Nicaraguans.

We have spoken several times about the insignificant character of the
revolutions in South America. We think it may interest our readers if we
quote for them the statement on this subject, made by a gentleman who has
been a good many years in Honduras, and who has large interests there.

He says: "A revolution down there is really nothing but an election.

"At election times the candidate for the Presidency who controls the guns
wins the election. If the President doesn't suit after he is elected, some
man gathers a force together, and a revolution follows.

"As nobody pays much attention to an election, so nobody pays much
attention to a revolution, except those most nearly interested in its
success or failure.

"The present President, Senor Bonilla, came into office after he had
carried through a successful revolution against somebody else.

"He is a clever man, and absolutely honest, but his standard is too high
for Honduras."

Richard Harding Davis has written a story called "Soldiers of Fortune,"
which gives a very excellent account of one of these South American
revolutions.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Massachusetts Assembly has made its annual appropriation for the
destruction of the Gipsy moth.

This is a moth whose larvae (as the caterpillars are called) do so much
damage to foliage that the State has spent large sums of money in an
attempt to destroy the troublesome pest. The matter has now been brought
to the attention of Congress, and in the last Agricultural Appropriation
Bill a special provision was made for a careful investigation of the
matter.

The caterpillar of the Gipsy moth strips the trees of their leaves as
completely as if they had been swept by fire. Almost every variety of
tree, as well as of farm or garden crop, is attacked by these worms, and
the farmers in Eastern Massachusetts are terror-stricken over the army of
them which yearly attacks their crops.

The history of the introduction of the Gipsy moth into this country is a
somewhat curious one.

The moth is not a native of this country, but of Germany and Austria,
where vast sums of money have also been spent by the governments in a vain
endeavor to get rid of it.

In 1869 a French naturalist came over to this country and settled in
Medford, Mass.

He had brought some Gipsy moth eggs with him from Europe, and intended
making some experiments with them.

He had the eggs out on his table one morning when he was called away from
his work. He went out of the room, leaving the eggs lying near the window.

When he returned he found that a puff of wind had blown the whole paper of
eggs out of the window.

He ran down into the garden and searched everywhere for the lost eggs, but
in their flight through the air they had become scattered, and he was
unable to find them.

He well knew the dangerous character of the worm which hatches out of
these eggs, and he went all round the village, explaining to every one,
warning every one, and imploring every one to be on the look-out for the
caterpillars when they should appear.

The inhabitants of Medford thought he was a crazy Frenchman, and took no
notice of his warning.

It was twenty years after this before the people began to suffer from the
ravages of the caterpillar, though for several years the neighbors of the
old naturalist had been annoyed and puzzled at the way in which their
gardens were eaten up.

In 1889 the worms became so numerous, and did so much damage, that the
Legislature set aside a sum of money for their destruction, and appointed
a number of scientific men to undertake the work.

Every spring since then the Gipsy Moth Commission has been at work.

One summer, policemen were pressed into the service. They were stationed
on all the roads leading out of the infected districts to examine every
vehicle that drove through, to see that none of the caterpillars escaped
into the surrounding country by clinging to the wheels or the body of the
wagon.

That year there were such myriads of these caterpillars, that they would
fall by hundreds on the vehicles as they drove under the trees.

The moth policemen were both necessary and useful.

The Commission starts in, this year, with several new inventions for
destroying both caterpillars and eggs, and hopes to make good progress.

Thus far Massachusetts has spent nearly $1,000,000 in her effort to rid
herself of the Gipsy moth.

                                           GENIE H. ROSENFELD.





INVENTION AND DISCOVERY.

[Illustration]

Summer trips will be more easy to arrange and pack for, if we have such
space-saving inventions as the travelling or military hair-brush, as the
inventor calls it. It is a handleless brush, the back forming a box deep
enough to contain a comb, and provided with a sliding lid which pushes in
or out like the lid of a child's pencil-box.

[Illustration]

This invention comes from the ever-inventive West, and consists of a
penholder formed of tightly rolled paper which in some ingenious manner
holds the pen permanently in place.

At last we seem to have a mucilage brush that is going to answer every
requirement.

We have had them in plenty with the handles so arranged that the mucilage
would not get on one's fingers, and so that the neck of the bottle would
not get clogged. But so far every invention has fallen short in one very
important particular. The brush has always been left in the mucilage,
where it got hard and stiff and unusable for a time, or had to be lifted
out and put in a fresh compartment, where it again dries and hardens.

The new brush is so arranged that it does not touch the mucilage, but is
held above it by a spring in the handle. When the gum is to be used, the
top of the handle is pressed, and the brush is forced down into the bottle
until it meets the liquid.

The moment the finger is taken off the handle, the brush springs back into
place; and when taken out of the bottle it is found to be furnished with a
metal rim which prevents any of the liquid from touching the fingers.

[Illustration]

We have chronometers which can register time, and odometers which can
register distance, but there has been the double weight to carry of the
two instruments; and, while every effort is being made to reduce the
weight of the bicycle as much as possible, every ounce or fraction of an
ounce tells. Consequently all cyclists are indebted to the man whose happy
thought it was to combine the two, and who had the skill to do it. An
instrument can now be had which will at one and the same time register
time and distance.

[Illustration]

Something new which will surely find favor with bicycle riders is a
simple coupling apparatus by means of which any two safety bicycles may be
converted into a tandem. We see so many bicycle tandems in the parks and
bicycle paths that riders will surely be glad to know that any two people
can have a tandem at a moment's notice, and at the same time, if one
person only wishes to ride, the machines can with equal speed be restored
to their original condition.




LETTERS FROM OUR YOUNG FRIENDS.


    DEAR EDITOR:

    I read with the greatest pleasure THE GREAT ROUND WORLD, and
    think, if I may express myself so, that it tells all that is
    going on in a nutshell.

    We subscribe for your little magazine in our class, and we all
    take turns reading it.

    I wish you would inform me the difference between the government
    of Russia and that of Turkey.

                                 Very truly yours,
                                        ROBERTSON P.
    NEW YORK, May 7th, 1897.


DEAR ROBERTSON:

Russia is an absolute monarchy, which means a government in which the will
of the monarch is positive law.

Turkey is a theocratic absolute monarchy, which means something stronger
yet than an absolute monarchy. The Sultan of Turkey is considered the
successor to the Prophet Mohammed, and therefore he is not only the
political but also the religious head of his people.

                                                      EDITOR.


    DEAR EDITOR:

    I read THE GREAT ROUND WORLD and think it fine. The following
    are books I have read and found very interesting: "A Knight of
    the White Cross," by Henty. "Boy Explorers," by Prentice. "Jack
    Ballister's Fortunes," "Merry Adventures of Robin Hood," both
    by Pyle. "Log-Cabin Series," by Edward S. Ellis. "Boris the Bear
    Hunter," by Fred Whishaw.

    Did the ten Chinamen who were invited to have their heads
    chopped off, escape?

    Wishing great success to THE GREAT ROUND WORLD,

                     I remain your faithful reader,
                                           HOWARD B.
    NEW YORK CITY, May 2d, 1897.


DEAR HOWARD:

It is too soon to know about the Chinamen yet. They came from San
Francisco to see the Chinese Minister in Washington. There was to be a
change of Chinese Ministers in this country, and it was expected that Mr.
Yang Yu, the gentleman who was leaving this country, would go back to
Peking, and so the See Yups wanted to make him the bearer of their
messages.

Mr. Yang Yu has, however, been appointed to St. Petersburg, in Russia, and
it is doubtful if he can be of much use to his countrymen, as he may not
go to China for several years.

It is to be supposed that the Chinamen under sentence of death will have
the sense to remain in this country, where they are safe.     EDITOR.


    DEAR EDITOR:

    I like Cuba. Do you think Cuba is winning, or Spain? I hope Cuba
    will win. I am six years old. I like THE GREAT ROUND WORLD.
    Please put me in the paper. I think that monster you wrote about
    was very nice, but I would not like him to catch me, and I like
    the lazy man's stairs. Good-by.

                                  Yours truly,
                                            ROBERT D.F.
    BALTIMORE, MD.


    DEAR EDITOR:

    I think THE GREAT ROUND WORLD is fine for young folks to read,
    and even for grown-up people, too. I enjoy reading it very much.
    I think there is no other little book that will do us so much
    good as THE GREAT ROUND WORLD.

    I hope the United States will make Spain pay for the cruelty
    that was done to Dr. Ruiz by them. It looks as if Cuba will win
    her freedom from Spain, and I hope she will. I remain,

                                       Yours truly,
                                                HENRY H.
    GLOUCESTER, MASS., April 14th, 1897.


    DEAR EDITOR:

    I like THE GREAT ROUND WORLD very much. I anxiously wait for it
    to come. I hope Cuba and Spain and all countries will soon be
    free from war. Do you think that Greece can keep its little
    island Crete? I was very much interested in the story about the
    St. Bernard.

                                    Yours truly,
                                             EDITH MCK.
    GLOUCHESTER, MASS., April 14th, 1897.


The Editor takes much pleasure in acknowledging the very nice letters from
Robert D.F., Henry H., and Edith McK. They are all nice, well-written
letters, which the Editor is very pleased to receive.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Editor would be much pleased if Ph.D. (McCoy Hall, Baltimore, Md.)
would explain his views on the Bering Sea Arbitration Award.

The columns of THE GREAT ROUND WORLD are always open to arguments on both
sides of a question.

If Ph.D. will favor us with a few lines on the subject we shall be
delighted to publish them.

                                                      EDITOR.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Revised List, with Prices, of School-Books that will be taken in
Exchange for Subscriptions to "The Great Round World."=

ARITHMETICS

    Sheldon's Complete                                       20
    Stoddard's Mental                                         5
        "      Intellectual                                  10
    Thomson's New Practical                                  15
        "     Commercial                                     30
    Wentworth's Mental                                       10
        "       New Practical                                20
        "       High School                                  30
    White's New Elementary                                   15
        "    "  Complete                                     20


    ALGEBRAS

    Boyden's Elementary                                      20
    Bradbury's Beginners'                                    20
    Brooks' (red cover)                                      25
    Milnes' First Book                                       20
       "    High School                                      35
    Ray's New Elementary                                     25
    Robinson's New Elementary                                35
    Wells' Academic                                          35
      "    College                                           50
      "    Higher                                            35
    Wentworth's First Steps                                  20
        "       Elementary                                   25
        "       School                                       30
        "       Higher                                       40
        "       College                                      40
        "       Complete                                     40
    White's New Algebra                                      40


    BOTANY

    Apgar's Trees                                            30
    Bessey's Elementary                                      25
       "     Briefer                                         35
       "     Large                                           50
    Dana's Wild Flowers                                      50
    Gray's How Plants Grow                                   25
      "    Revised Lessons                                   30
      "       "    Manual                                    50
      "       "    Lessons and
               Manual (1 vol.).                              65
    Vine's Botany                                            75
    Wood's Botanist (red cover)                              50
      "    Class Book "    "                                 75


    LATIN and GREEK

    Allen and Greenough's
        Caesar (after 1890)                                   40
        Cicero      "                                        40
        Grammar (revised)                                    40
    Chase and Stuart's
        Cicero (after 1893)                                  35
        Caesar        "                                       35
        Horace       "                                       35
        Virgil       " (6 bks.)                              35
    Collar and Daniel's
        Beginners' Latin Book                                30
        First Latin Book                                     30
    Coy's First Latin Book                                   25
    Frieze's Virgil (with Vocabulary, after 1893)            40
    Goodwin's
        Anabasis (after 1895)                                50
        Greek Gra. (after 1895)                              50
    Greenough's
       Horace                                                35
       Virgil (with Vocabulary)                              40
    Harkness'
        Caesar (after 1894)                                   40
        Cicero      "                                        40
        Latin Gram. (after 1890)                             35
    Tuel & Fowler's First Book                               30
    White's First Greek Book                                 30
       "  Beginners' Greek Book                              50


    GRAMMARS

    Brown's Revised First Lines                              10
       "    English                                          20
    Butler's School English                                  25
    Hart's Gram. and Analysis                                15
    Hyde's First Book                                        10
      "    Second " (with Sup.)                              20
      "    Advanced                                          15
    Maxwell's First Book                                     15
        "   Intro  (green cov.)                              15
        "   Advanced     "                                   25
    Metcalf's Elementary                                     20
       "      English Grammar                                25
    Reed's Introductory                                      15
    Reed and Kellogg's Elementary (after 1890)               15
    Read and Kellogg's Higher (after 1890)                   25
    Smith's English (revised)                                10
    Whitney's Essent. of Gram.                               15
    Whitney & Lockwood's                                     20


    COMPOSITION, RHETORIC, AND LITERATURE

    Brooks' English Literature.                              10
    Genung's Rhetorics       each                            35
    Hart's large "(red edge)"                                35
    Kellogg's Rhetoric (343 pp.)                             30
       "      Literature                                     35
    Lockwood's Lessons in Eng.                               35
    Matthew's Literature                                     35
    Shaw's New    "    (rev.)                                40
    Swinton's Studies in Lit                                 35
    Waddy's Composition                                      35
    Westlake's Literature                                    15


    GEOMETRY, TRIGONOMETRY, ETC.

    Chauvenet's Rev. Geometry                                30
    Davies' Legendre (after 1885)                            40
    Loomis' Revised Geometry                                 25
    Olney's New Elem.  "                                     30
    Wells' Rev. Plane Geometry.                              30
      "     "   P. and S. Geom.                              50
      " (old ed.)   "      "                                 25
      " Rev. Trigonometry                                    30
    Wentworth's New P. Geom.                                 25
        "        "  P. and S. Geometry                       50
        "  Trig., Surv., & Tables                            40


    GEOGRAPHIES
    (With North and South Dakota)

    Appleton's Physical                                      35
        "      First Book                                    15
        "      Elementary                                    20
        "      Higher                                        35
    Barnes' Elementary                                       15
    Barnes' Complete                                         25
    Butler's Elementary                                      20
       "     Complete                                        35
    Cornell's First Steps                                    10
       "    New Primary                                      15
    Frye's Elementary                                        20
       "    Complete                                         40
    Guyot's New Physical                                     50
    Harper's Introductory                                    15
       "     School                                          35
    Houston's New Physical                                   40
    Longman's Geography                                      25
       "      Atlas                                          40
    Maury's Elementary                                       15
       "    Manual                                           35
    Monteith's First Lessons                                 10
       "      Introductory                                   15
       "      Manual                                         25
       "      New Physical                                   30
    Rand & McNally's Primary                                 15
      "       "      Larger                                  30
    Redway's                                                 30
    Swinton's Primary                                        15
       "      Elementary                                     20
       "      Introductory                                   15
       "      Grammar School                                 30
       "      Complete                                       30
    Tarr's Physical                                          40
    Tarbell's Elementary                                     20
        "     Larger                                         40
    Tilden's Grammar School                                  20
    Warren's New Primary                                     15
       "     Brief                                           25
       "     Common School                                   30
       "     New Physical                                    50


    CHEMISTRY, PHYSIOLOGY, AND PHYSICS

    Appleton's Physics                                       80
    Avery's School Physics                                   40
       "    Complete Chemistry                               40
    Blaisdel's Physiologies (cloth cover, Ginn's Edit.)      20
    Barker's College Chemistry                               30
       "     Physics                                         50
    Carhart and Chute's Physics                              30

=Send by Prepaid Express, put your name and address in package also full
list of the books. All books must be clean and perfect.=

_We can use new issues of all standard text books. Send list with titles
and dates._

       *       *       *       *       *

Which Is Your Favorite

_BICYCLE_

You have your choice of any wheel in the market if you send us one hundred
regular subscriptions to the

"Great Round World"

Show the paper to your friends, and you will soon find one hundred people
who will be glad to subscribe. Send the subscriptions in to us as fast as
received, and when the one hundredth, reaches us you can go to ANY dealer
YOU choose, buy ANY wheel YOU choose, and we will pay the bill.

Six-months' subscriptions will be counted as one-half, three-months' as
one-quarter,

_SAMPLE COPIES WILL BE FURNISHED AT HALF PRICE. (SEE OTHER OFFERS)_

Great Round World
3 and 5 West 18th Street, New York City

       *       *       *       *       *


The Special Trial Rate for
TEACHERS will expire June 1st

This rate is $1 a year, net
Regular rate, $2.50 a year


WE TRUST TO RECEIVE YOUR SUBSCRIPTION BEFORE THE
TIME OF EXPIRATION


       *       *       *       *       *

A COPY OF THE PAPER WILL BE SENT TO ANY TEACHER
WHO HAS NOT SEEN IT


We can use school-books in
exchange for subscriptions

_SEE LIST_

       *       *       *       *       *

THE GREAT ROUND WORLD
3 & 5 West 18th Street, New York City





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is
Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 29, May 27, 1897, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD AND ***

***** This file should be named 15601.txt or 15601.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/5/6/0/15601/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team (www.pgdp.net)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
