The Project Gutenberg EBook of Bob's Redemption, by W.W. Jacobs

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Bob's Redemption
       Captains All, Book 5.

Author: W.W. Jacobs

Release Date: February 21, 2004 [EBook #11185]

Language: English

Character set encoding: US-ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BOB'S REDEMPTION ***




Produced by David Widger




CAPTAINS ALL

By W.W. Jacobs



BOB'S REDEMPTION

[Illustration: "Bob's Redemption."]

"GRATITOODE!" said the night-watchman, with a hard laugh.  "_Hmf!_  Don't
talk to me about gratitoode; I've seen too much of it.  If people wot
I've helped in my time 'ad only done arf their dooty--arf, mind you--I
should be riding in my carriage."

Forgetful of the limitations of soap-boxes he attempted to illustrate his
remark by lolling, and nearly went over backwards.  Recovering himself by
an effort he gazed sternly across the river and smoked fiercely.  It was
evident that he was brooding over an ill-used past.

'Arry Thomson was one of them, he said, at last.  For over six months I
wrote all 'is love-letters for him, 'e being an iggernerant sort of man
and only being able to do the kisses at the end, which he always insisted
on doing 'imself: being jealous.  Only three weeks arter he was married
'e come up to where I was standing one day and set about me without
saying a word.  I was a single man at the time and I didn't understand
it.  My idea was that he 'ad gone mad, and, being pretty artful and
always 'aving a horror of mad people, I let 'im chase me into a
police-station.  Leastways, I would ha' let 'im, but he didn't come,
and I all but got fourteen days for being drunk and disorderly.

Then there was Bill Clark.  He 'ad been keeping comp'ny with a gal and
got tired of it, and to oblige 'im I went to her and told 'er he was a
married man with five children.  Bill was as pleased as Punch at fust,
but as soon as she took up with another chap he came round to see me and
said as I'd ruined his life.  We 'ad words about it--naturally--and I did
ruin it then to the extent of a couple o' ribs.  I went to see 'im in the
horsepittle--place I've always been fond of--and the langwidge he used to
me was so bad that they sent for the Sister to 'ear it.

That's on'y two out of dozens I could name.  Arf the unpleasantnesses in
my life 'ave come out of doing kindnesses to people, and all the
gratitoode I've 'ad for it I could put in a pint-pot with a pint o' beer
already in it.

The only case o' real gratitoode I ever heard of 'appened to a shipmate
o' mine--a young chap named Bob Evans.  Coming home from Auckland in a
barque called the _Dragon Fly_ he fell overboard, and another chap named
George Crofts, one o' the best swimmers I ever knew, went overboard arter
'im and saved his life.

We was hardly moving at the time, and the sea was like a duck pond, but
to 'ear Bob Evans talk you'd ha' thought that George Crofts was the
bravest-'arted chap that ever lived.  He 'adn't liked him afore, same as
the rest of us, George being a sly, mean sort o' chap; but arter George
'ad saved his life 'e couldn't praise 'im enough.  He said that so long
as he 'ad a crust George should share it, and wotever George asked 'im he
should have.

The unfortnit part of it was that George took 'im at his word, and all
the rest of the v'y'ge he acted as though Bob belonged to 'im, and by the
time we got into the London river Bob couldn't call his soul 'is own.  He
used to take a room when he was ashore and live very steady, as 'e was
saving up to get married, and as soon as he found that out George invited
'imself to stay with him.

"It won't cost you a bit more," he ses, "not if you work it properly."

Bob didn't work it properly, but George having saved his life, and never
letting 'im forget it, he didn't like to tell him so.  He thought he'd
let 'im see gradual that he'd got to be careful because of 'is gal, and
the fust evening they was ashore 'e took 'im along with 'im there to tea.

Gerty Mitchell--that was the gal's name--'adn't heard of Bob's accident,
and when she did she gave a little scream, and putting 'er arms round his
neck, began to kiss 'im right in front of George and her mother.

"You ought to give him one too," ses Mrs. Mitchell, pointing to George.

George wiped 'is mouth on the back of his 'and, but Gerty pretended not
to 'ear.

"Fancy if you'd been drownded!" she ses, hugging Bob agin.

"He was pretty near," ses George, shaking his 'ead.  "I'm a pore swimmer,
but I made up my mind either to save 'im or else go down to a watery
grave myself."

He wiped his mouth on the back of his 'and agin, but all the notice Gerty
took of it was to send her young brother Ted out for some beer.  Then
they all 'ad supper together, and Mrs. Mitchell drank good luck to George
in a glass o' beer, and said she 'oped that 'er own boy would grow up
like him.  "Let 'im grow up a good and brave man, that's all I ask," she
ses.  "I don't care about 'is looks."

"He might have both," ses George, sharp-like.  "Why not?"

Mrs. Mitchell said she supposed he might, and then she cuffed young Ted's
ears for making a noise while 'e was eating, and then cuffed 'im agin for
saying that he'd finished 'is supper five minutes ago.

George and Bob walked 'ome together, and all the way there George said
wot a pretty gal Gerty was and 'ow lucky it was for Bob that he 'adn't
been drownded.  He went round to tea with 'im the next day to Mrs.
Mitchell's, and arter tea, when Bob and Gerty said they was going out to
spend the evening together, got 'imself asked too.

They took a tram-car and went to a music-hall, and Bob paid for the three
of 'em.  George never seemed to think of putting his 'and in his pocket,
and even arter the music-hall, when they all went into a shop and 'ad
stewed eels, he let Bob pay.

As I said afore, Bob Evans was chock-full of gratefulness, and it seemed
only fair that he shouldn't grumble at spending a little over the man wot
'ad risked 'is life to save his; but wot with keeping George at his room,
and paying for 'im every time they went out, he was spending a lot more
money than 'e could afford.

"You're on'y young once, Bob," George said to him when 'e made a remark
one arternoon as to the fast way his money was going, "and if it hadn't
ha' been for me you'd never 'ave lived to grow old."

Wot with spending the money and always 'aving George with them when they
went out, it wasn't long afore Bob and Gerty 'ad a quarrel.  "I don't
like a pore-spirited man," she ses.  "Two's company and three's none,
and, besides, why can't he pay for 'imself?  He's big enough.  Why should
you spend your money on 'im?  He never pays a farthing."

Bob explained that he couldn't say anything because 'e owed his life to
George, but 'e might as well 'ave talked to a lamp-post.  The more he
argued the more angry Gerty got, and at last she ses, "Two's company and
three's none, and if you and me can't go out without George Crofts, then
me and 'im 'll go out with-out you."

She was as good as her word, too, and the next night, while Bob 'ad gone
out to get some 'bacca, she went off alone with George.  It was ten
o'clock afore they came back agin, and Gerty's eyes were all shining and
'er cheeks as pink as roses.  She shut 'er mother up like a concertina
the moment she began to find fault with 'er, and at supper she sat next
to George and laughed at everything 'e said.

George and Bob walked all the way 'ome arter supper without saying a
word, but arter they got to their room George took a side-look at Bob,
and then he ses, suddenlike, "Look 'ere!  I saved your life, didn't I?"

"You did," ses Bob, "and I thank you for it."

"I saved your life," ses George agin, very solemn.  "If it hadn't ha'
been for me you couldn't ha' married anybody."

"That's true," ses Bob.

"Me and Gerty 'ave been having a talk," ses George, bending down to undo
his boots.  "We've been getting on very well together; you can't 'elp
your feelings, and the long and the short of it is, the pore gal has
fallen in love with me."

Bob didn't say a word.

"If you look at it this way it's fair enough," ses George.  "I gave you
your life and you give me your gal.  We're quits now.  You don't owe me
anything and I don't owe you anything.  That's the way Gerty puts it, and
she told me to tell you so."

"If--if she don't want me I'm agreeable," ses Bob, in a choking voice.
"We'll call it quits, and next time I tumble overboard I 'ope you won't
be handy."

He took Gerty's photygraph out of 'is box and handed it to George.
"You've got more right to it now than wot I 'ave," he ses.  "I shan't go
round there any more; I shall look out for a ship to-morrow."

George Crofts said that perhaps it was the best thing he could do, and 'e
asked 'im in a offhand sort o' way 'ow long the room was paid up for.

Mrs. Mitchell 'ad a few words to say about it next day, but Gerty told
'er to save 'er breath for walking upstairs.  The on'y thing that George
didn't like when they went out was that young Ted was with them, but
Gerty said she preferred it till she knew 'im better; and she 'ad so much
to say about his noble behaviour in saving life that George gave way.
They went out looking at the shops, George thinking that that was the
cheapest way of spending an evening, and they were as happy as possible
till Gerty saw a brooch she liked so much in a window that he couldn't
get 'er away.

"It is a beauty," she ses.  "I don't know when I've seen a brooch I liked
better.  Look here!  Let's all guess the price and then go in and see
who's right."

They 'ad their guesses, and then they went in and asked, and as soon as
Gerty found that it was only three-and-sixpence she began to feel in her
pocket for 'er purse, just like your wife does when you go out with 'er,
knowing all the time that it's on the mantelpiece with twopence-ha'penny
and a cough lozenge in it.

"I must ha' left it at 'ome," she ses, looking at George.

"Just wot I've done," ses George, arter patting 'is pockets.

Gerty bit 'er lips and, for a minute or two, be civil to George she could
not.  Then she gave a little smile and took 'is arm agin, and they walked
on talking and laughing till she turned round of a sudden and asked a big
chap as was passing wot 'e was shoving 'er for.

"Shoving you?" ses he.  "Wot do you think I want to shove you for?"

"Don't you talk to me," ses Gerty, firing up.  "George, make 'im beg my
pardon."

"You ought to be more careful," ses George, in a gentle sort o' way.

"Make 'im beg my pardon," ses Gerty, stamping 'er foot; "if he don't,
knock 'im down."

"Yes, knock 'im down," ses the big man, taking hold o' George's cap and
rumpling his 'air.

Pore George, who was never much good with his fists, hit 'im in the
chest, and the next moment he was on 'is back in the middle o' the road
wondering wot had 'appened to 'im.  By the time 'e got up the other man
was arf a mile away; and young Ted stepped up and wiped 'im down with a
pocket-'andkerchief while Gerty explained to 'im 'ow she saw 'im slip on
a piece o' banana peel.

"It's 'ard lines," she ses; "but never mind, you frightened 'im away,
and I don't wonder at it.  You do look terrible when you're angry,
George; I didn't know you."

She praised 'im all the way 'ome, and if it 'adn't been for his mouth and
nose George would 'ave enjoyed it more than 'e did.  She told 'er mother
how 'e had flown at a big man wot 'ad insulted her, and Mrs. Mitchell
shook her 'ead at 'im and said his bold spirit would lead 'im into
trouble afore he 'ad done.

They didn't seem to be able to make enough of 'im, and next day when he
went round Gerty was so upset at the sight of 'is bruises that he thought
she was going to cry.  When he had 'ad his tea she gave 'im a cigar she
had bought for 'im herself, and when he 'ad finished smoking it she
smiled at him, and said that she was going to take 'im out for a pleasant
evening to try and make up to 'im for wot he 'ad suffered for 'er.

"We're all going to stand treat to each other," she ses.  "Bob always
would insist on paying for everything, but I like to feel a bit
independent.  Give and take--that's the way I like to do things."

"There's nothing like being independent," ses George.  "Bob ought to ha'
known that."

"I'm sure it's the best plan," ses Gerty.  "Now, get your 'at on.  We're
going to a theayter, and Ted shall pay the 'bus fares."

George wanted to ask about the theayter, but 'e didn't like to, and arter
Gerty was dressed they went out and Ted paid the 'bus fares like a man.

"Here you are," ses Gerty, as the 'bus stopped outside the theayter.
"Hurry up and get the tickets, George; ask for three upper circles."

She bustled George up to the pay place, and as soon as she 'ad picked out
the seats she grabbed 'old of the tickets and told George to make haste.

"Twelve shillings it is," ses the man, as George put down arf a crown.

"Twelve?" ses George, beginning to stammer.  "Twelve?  Twelve?  Twel--?"

"Twelve shillings," ses the man; "three upper circles you've 'ad."

George was going to fetch Gerty back and 'ave cheaper seats, but she 'ad
gone inside with young Ted, and at last, arter making an awful fuss, he
paid the rest o' the money and rushed in arter her, arf crazy at the idea
o' spending so much money.

"Make 'aste," ses Gerty, afore he could say anything; "the band 'as just
begun."

She started running upstairs, and she was so excited that, when they got
their seats and George started complaining about the price, she didn't
pay any attention to wot he was saying, but kept pointing out ladies'
dresses to 'im in w'ispers and wondering wot they 'ad paid for them.
George gave it up at last, and then he sat wondering whether he 'ad done
right arter all in taking Bob's gal away from him.

Gerty enjoyed it very much, but when the curtain came down after the
first act she leaned back in her chair and looked up at George and said
she felt faint and thought she'd like to 'ave an ice-cream.  "And you
'ave one too, dear," she ses, when young Ted 'ad got up and beckoned to
the gal, "and Ted 'ud like one too, I'm sure."

She put her 'ead on George's shoulder and looked up at 'im.  Then she put
her 'and on his and stroked it, and George, reckoning that arter all
ice-creams were on'y a ha'penny or at the most a penny each, altered 'is
mind about not spending any more money and ordered three.

The way he carried on when the gal said they was three shillings was
alarming.  At fust 'e thought she was 'aving a joke with 'im, and it took
another gal and the fireman and an old gentleman wot was sitting behind
'im to persuade 'im different.  He was so upset that 'e couldn't eat his
arter paying for it, and Ted and Gerty had to finish it for 'im.

"They're expensive, but they're worth the money," ses Gerty.  "You are
good to me, George.  I could go on eating 'em all night, but you mustn't
fling your money away like this always."

"I'll see to that," ses George, very bitter.

"I thought we was going to stand treat to each other?  That was the idea,
I understood."

"So we are," ses Gerty.  "Ted stood the 'bus fares, didn't he?"

"He did," ses George, "wot there was of 'em; but wot about you?"

"Me?" ses Gerty, drawing her 'ead back and staring at 'im.  "Why, 'ave
you forgot that cigar already, George?"

George opened 'is mouth, but 'e couldn't speak a word.  He sat looking at
'er and making a gasping noise in 'is throat, and fortunately just as 'e
got 'is voice back the curtain went up agin, and everybody said,
"_H'sh!_"

He couldn't enjoy the play at all, 'e was so upset, and he began to see
more than ever 'ow wrong he 'ad been in taking Bob's gal away from 'im.
He walked downstairs into the street like a man in a dream, with Gerty
sticking to 'is arm and young Ted treading on 'is heels behind.

"Now, you mustn't waste any more money, George," ses Gerty, when they got
outside.  "We'll walk 'ome."

George 'ad got arf a mind to say something about a 'bus, but he
remembered in time that very likely young Ted hadn't got any more money.
Then Gerty said she knew a short cut, and she took them, walking along
little, dark, narrow streets and places, until at last, just as George
thought they must be pretty near 'ome, she began to dab her eyes with 'er
pocket-'andkerchief and say she'd lost 'er way.

"You two go 'ome and leave me," she ses, arf crying.  "I can't walk
another step."

"Where are we?" ses George, looking round.

"I don't know," ses Gerty.  "I couldn't tell you if you paid me.  I must
'ave taken a wrong turning.  Oh, hurrah!  Here's a cab!"

Afore George could stop 'er she held up 'er umbrella, and a 'ansom cab,
with bells on its horse, crossed the road and pulled up in front of 'em.
Ted nipped in first and Gerty followed 'im.

"Tell 'im the address, dear, and make 'aste and get in," ses Gerty.

George told the cabman, and then he got in and sat on Ted's knee, partly
on Gerty's umbrella, and mostly on nothing.

"You are good to me, George," ses Gerty, touching the back of 'is neck
with the brim of her hat.  "It ain't often I get a ride in a cab.  All
the time I was keeping company with Bob we never 'ad one once.  I only
wish I'd got the money to pay for it."

George, who was going to ask a question, stopped 'imself, and then he
kept striking matches and trying to read all about cab fares on a bill in
front of 'im.

"'Ow are we to know 'ow many miles it is?" he ses, at last.

"I don't know," ses Gerty; "leave it to the cabman.  It's his bisness,
ain't it?  And if 'e don't know he must suffer for it."

There was hardly a soul in Gerty's road when they got there, but afore
George 'ad settled with the cabman there was a policeman moving the crowd
on and arf the winders in the road up.  By the time George had paid 'im
and the cabman 'ad told him wot 'e looked like, Gerty and Ted 'ad
disappeared indoors, all the lights was out, and, in a state o' mind that
won't bear thinking of, George walked 'ome to his lodging.

[Illustration: "Afore George had settled with the cabman, there was a
policeman moving the crowd on."]

Bob was asleep when he got there, but 'e woke 'im up and told 'im about
it, and then arter a time he said that he thought Bob ought to pay arf
because he 'ad saved 'is life.

"Cert'nly not," ses Bob.  "We're quits now; that was the arrangement.
I only wish it was me spending the money on her; I shouldn't grumble."

George didn't get a wink o' sleep all night for thinking of the money he
'ad spent, and next day when he went round he 'ad almost made up 'is mind
to tell Bob that if 'e liked to pay up the money he could 'ave Gerty
back; but she looked so pretty, and praised 'im up so much for 'is
generosity, that he began to think better of it.  One thing 'e was
determined on, and that was never to spend money like that agin for fifty
Gertys.

There was a very sensible man there that evening that George liked very
much.  His name was Uncle Joe, and when Gerty was praising George to 'is
face for the money he 'ad been spending, Uncle Joe, instead o' looking
pleased, shook his 'ead over it.

"Young people will be young people, I know," he ses, "but still I don't
approve of extravagance.  Bob Evans would never 'ave spent all that money
over you."

"Bob Evans ain't everybody," ses Mrs. Mitchell, standing up for Gerty.

"He was steady, anyway," ses Uncle Joe.  "Besides, Gerty ought not to ha'
let Mr. Crofts spend his money like that.  She could ha' prevented it if
she'd ha' put 'er foot down and insisted on it."

He was so solemn about it that everybody began to feel a bit upset, and
Gerty borrowed Ted's pocket-'andkerchief, and then wiped 'er eyes on the
cuff of her dress instead.

"Well, well," ses Uncle Joe; "I didn't mean to be 'ard, but don't do it
no more.  You are young people, and can't afford it."

"We must 'ave a little pleasure sometimes," ses Gerty.

"Yes, I know," ses Uncle Joe; "but there's moderation in everything.
Look 'ere, it's time somebody paid for Mr. Crofts.  To-morrow's Saturday,
and, if you like, I'll take you all to the Crystal Palace."

Gerty jumped up off of 'er chair and kissed 'im, while Mrs. Mitchell said
she knew 'is bark was worse than 'is bite, and asked 'im who was wasting
his money now?

"You meet me at London Bridge Station at two o'clock," ses Uncle Joe,
getting up to go.  "It ain't extravagance for a man as can afford it."

He shook 'ands with George Crofts and went, and, arter George 'ad stayed
long enough to hear a lot o' things about Uncle Joe which made 'im think
they'd get on very well together, he went off too.

They all turned up very early the next arternoon, and Gerty was dressed
so nice that George couldn't take his eyes off of her.  Besides her there
was Mrs. Mitchell and Ted and a friend of 'is named Charlie Smith.

They waited some time, but Uncle Joe didn't turn up, and they all got
looking at the clock and talking about it, and 'oping he wouldn't make
'em miss the train.

"Here he comes!" ses Ted, at last.

Uncle Joe came rushing in, puffing and blowing as though he'd bust.
"Take 'em on by this train, will you?" he ses, catching 'old o' George by
the arm.  "I've just been stopped by a bit o' business I must do, and
I'll come on by the next, or as soon arter as I can."

He rushed off again, puffing and blowing his 'ardest, in such a hurry
that he forgot to give George the money for the tickets.  However, George
borrowed a pencil of Mrs. Mitchell in the train, and put down on paper
'ow much they cost, and Mrs. Mitchell said if George didn't like to
remind 'im she would.

They left young Ted and Charlie to stay near the station when they got to
the Palace, Uncle Joe 'aving forgotten to say where he'd meet 'em, but
train arter train came in without 'im, and at last the two boys gave it
up.

"We're sure to run across 'im sooner or later," ses Gerty.  "Let's 'ave
something to eat; I'm so hungry."

George said something about buns and milk, but Gerty took 'im up sharp.
"Buns and milk?" she ses.  "Why, uncle would never forgive us if we
spoilt his treat like that."

She walked into a refreshment place and they 'ad cold meat and bread and
pickles and beer and tarts and cheese, till even young Ted said he'd 'ad
enough, but still they couldn't see any signs of Uncle Joe.  They went on
to the roundabouts to look for 'im, and then into all sorts o' shows at
sixpence a head, but still there was no signs of 'im, and George had 'ad
to start on a fresh bit o' paper to put down wot he'd spent.

"I suppose he must ha' been detained on important business," ses Gerty,
at last.

"Unless it's one of 'is jokes," ses Mrs. Mitchell, shaking her 'ead.
"You know wot your uncle is, Gerty."

"There now, I never thought o' that," ses Gerty, with a start; "p'r'aps
it is."

"Joke?"  ses George, choking and staring from one to the other.

"I was wondering where he'd get the money from," ses Mrs. Mitchell to
Gerty.  "I see it all now; I never see such a man for a bit o' fun in all
my born days.  And the solemn way he went on last night, too.  Why, he
must ha' been laughing in 'is sleeve all the time.  It's as good as a
play."

"Look here!" ses George, 'ardly able to speak; "do you mean to tell me he
never meant to come?"

"I'm afraid not," ses Mrs. Mitchell, "knowing wot he is.  But don't you
worry; I'll give him a bit o' my mind when I see 'im."

George Crofts felt as though he'd burst, and then 'e got his breath, and
the things 'e said about Uncle Joe was so awful that Mrs. Mitchell told
the boys to go away.

"How dare you talk of my uncle like that?" ses Gerty, firing up.

"You forget yourself, George," ses Mrs. Mitchell.  "You'll like 'im when
you get to know 'im better."

"Don't you call me George," ses George Crofts, turning on 'er.  "I've
been done, that's wot I've been.  I 'ad fourteen pounds when I was paid
off, and it's melting like butter."

"Well, we've enjoyed ourselves," ses Gerty, "and that's what money was
given us for.  I'm sure those two boys 'ave had a splendid time, thanks
to you.  Don't go and spoil all by a little bit o' temper."

"Temper!" ses George, turning on her.  "I've done with you, I wouldn't
marry you if you was the on'y gal in the world.  I wouldn't marry you if
you paid me."

"Oh, indeed!" ses Gerty; "but if you think you can get out of it like
that you're mistaken.  I've lost my young man through you, and I'm not
going to lose you too.  I'll send my two big cousins round to see you
to-morrow."

"They won't put up with no nonsense, I can tell you," ses Mrs. Mitchell.

She called the boys to her, and then she and Gerty, arter holding their
'eads very high and staring at George, went off and left 'im alone.  He
went straight off 'ome, counting 'is money all the way and trying to make
it more, and, arter telling Bob 'ow he'd been treated, and trying hard to
get 'im to go shares in his losses, packed up his things and cleared out,
all boiling over with temper.

Bob was so dazed he couldn't make head or tail out of it, but 'e went
round to see Gerty the first thing next morning, and she explained things
to him.

"I don't know when I've enjoyed myself so much," she ses, wiping her
eyes, "but I've had enough gadding about for once, and if you come round
this evening we'll have a nice quiet time together looking at the
furniture shops."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Bob's Redemption, by W.W. Jacobs

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BOB'S REDEMPTION ***

***** This file should be named 11185.txt or 11185.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/1/1/8/11185/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


