The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is Going On
In It, Vol. 1, No. 38, July 29, 1897, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Great Round World and What Is Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 38, July 29, 1897
       A Weekly Magazine for Boys and Girls

Author: Various

Editor: Julia Truitt Bishop

Release Date: June 27, 2005 [EBook #16139]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD AND ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.(www.pgdp.net)





_FIVE CENTS._

THE GREAT ROUND WORLD
AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT

  Vol. 1                JULY 29, 1897                No. 38.
[Entered at Post Office, New York City, as second class matter]

[Illustration: A
WEEKLY
NEWSPAPER
FOR
BOYS AND
GIRLS]

Subscription
$2.50 per year
$1.25 6 months


    WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON. PUBLISHER
    NO. 3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST. NEW YORK CITY

=Copyright, 1897, by WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON.=


[Illustration: Books]

To any subscriber securing for us
        ... ...1 NEW SUBSCRIPTION

     _we will send post-paid any one of the following books. Printed on
     extra laid paper, bound in red buckram, gilt top._
     top....

     Andersen's Fairy Tales. By Hans Andersen.
     Allan Quatermain. By H. Rider Haggard.
     Auld Lang Syne. By V. Clark Russell.
     Adam Bede. By George Eliot.
     Abbe Constantin. By Ludovic Halevy.
     Ardath. By Marie Corelli.
     Big Bow Mystery. By I. Zangwill.
     Bondman. By Hall Caine.
     Beyond the City. By A. Conan Doyle.
     Black Beauty. By Anna Sewell.
     Beatrice. By H. Rider Haggard.
     Baron Munchausen. By Rudolph Raspe.
     Bryant's Poems. By William Cullen Bryant.
     Chouans. By Honore de Balzac.
     Cloister Wendhusen. By W. Heimburg.
     Country Sweetheart. By Dora Russell.
     Change of Air. By Anthony Hope.
     Cowper's Poems. By William Cowper.
     Cleopatra. By H. Rider Haggard.
     Deerslayer. By J. Fenimore Cooper.
     Desperate Remedies. By Thomas Hardy.
     Danira. By E. Werner.
     Duchess. By The Duchess.
     Dorothy's Double. By G.A. Henty.
     Diana of the Crossways. By George Meredith.
     Doctor Rameau. By Georges Ohnet.
     David Copperfield. By Charles Dickens.
     Dombey & Son. By Charles Dickens.
     Elsie. By W. Heimburg.
     Evolution of Dodd. By William Hawley Smith.
     Fromont Jr. and Risler Sr. By Alphonse Daudet.
     Flower of France. By Marah Ellis Ryan.
     Great Keinplatz Experiment. By A. Conan Doyle.
     Gladiators. By C.J. Whyte-Melville.
     Grimm's Fairy Tales.
     House of the Wolf. By Stanley Weyman.
     Harlequin Opal. By Fergus Hume.
     Hortense. By W. Heimburg.
     Heir of Redcliffe. By Charlotte M. Yonge.
     Han of Iceland. By Victor Hugo.
     Ironmaster. By Georges Ohnet.
     In All Shades. By Grant Allen.
     Jane Eyre. By Charlotte Bronte.
     Kings in Exile. By Alphonse Daudet.
     Kidnapped. By Robert Louis Stevenson.
     Little Rebel. By The Duchess.
     Last of the Mohicans. By J. Fenimore Cooper.
     Light that Failed. By Rudyard Kipling.
     Light of Asia. By Sir Edwin Arnold.

       *       *       *       *       *

             THE GREAT ROUND WORLD
     3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST.    NEW YORK CITY

       *      *       *       *       *

...PREMIUMS...

       *       *       *       *       *

TO ANY ONE SENDING US 4 NEW SUBSCRIBERS

[Illustration: A Pocket Kodak

     Measures 2-1/4 x 2-7/8 x 3-7/8 inches, makes a picture 1-1/2 x 2
     inches, and weighs only 5 ounces. Delivered ready for 12 exposures
     without reloading.]

The Lens is of the fixed focus type, and of sufficient length of focus
(2-1/2 inches) to avoid distortion.

Has improved rotary shutter and set of three stops for lens. The slides
for changing stops and for time exposures are alongside of the exposure
lever and always show by their position what stop is before the lens and
whether the shutter is set for time or instantaneous exposures, thus
acting as a warning.

In the _quality_ of the work they will do, Pocket Kodaks equal the best
cameras on the market. They make negatives of such perfect quality that
enlargements of any size can be made from them.

The Pocket Kodaks are covered with fine leather, and the trimmings are
handsomely finished and lacquered. They are elegant, artistic, and
durable.

=For one more subscription we will send with this camera a bicycle
carrying-case=

       *       *       *       *       *

TO ANY ONE SENDING US 9 NEW SUBSCRIBERS

[Illustration: An Improved
    =No. 4=
   Bulls-Eye

     For pictures 4x5 inches; delivered ready for 12 exposures without
     reloading. Size of camera, 4-7/8 x 5-7/8 x 9-1/4 inches; weight 2
     pounds 2 ounces; length of focus of lens, 6-1/4 inches.]

Fitted with an achromatic lens of superior quality, having a set of
three stops; has two finders, one for vertical and one for horizontal
exposures; and is also provided with two sockets for tripod screws, one
for vertical and one for horizontal exposures. Fitted with improved
rotary shutter, for snap-shots or time exposures. Can be loaded in
daylight. Handsomely finished and covered with leather.

=Both of the above cameras are manufactured by the Eastman Kodak Co.,
Rochester, N.Y., and this is a guarantee of their worth=

                 =THE GREAT ROUND WORLD=
     =3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST.         NEW YORK CITY=

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Books]

To any subscriber securing for us
        ... ...1 NEW SUBSCRIPTION

     _we will send post-paid any one of the following books. Printed on
     extra laid paper, bound in red buckram, gilt top._
     top....

     Last Days of Pompeii. By Bulwer Lytton.
     Lorna Doone. By R.D. Blackmore.
     Lucile. By Owen Meredith.
     Merze. By Mary Ellis Ryan.
     Man of Mark. By Anthony Hope.
     Master of Ballantrae. By Robert Louis Stevenson.
     Micah Clarke. By A. Conan Doyle.
     Misjudged. By W. Heimburg.
     Marvel. By The Duchess.
     Marriage at Sea. By W. Clark Russell.
     Marooned. By W. Clark Russell.
     My Lady Nicotine. By J.M. Barrie.
     Mayor of Casterbridge. By Thomas Hardy.
     Mill on the Floss. By George Eliot.
     Nicholas Nickleby. By Charles Dickens.
     Newcomes. By William M. Thackeray.
     Prairie. By J. Fenimore Cooper.
     Pioneers. By J. Fenimore Cooper.
     Pathfinder. By J. Fenimore Cooper.
     Pagan of the Alleghanies. By Mary Ellis Ryan.
     Phantom Rickshaw. By Rudyard Kipling.
     Price He Paid. By E. Werner.
     Pickwick Papers. By Charles Dickens.
     Red House. By The Duchess.
     Red Sultan. By J. Maclaren Cobban.
     Romance of Two Worlds. By M. Corelli.
     Reproach of Annesley. By Maxwell Grey.
     Rienzi. By Bulwer Lytton.
     Romola. By George Eliot.
     Son of Hagar. By Hall Caine.
     Squaw Elouise. By Mary Ellis Ryan.
     Sarchedon. By G.J. Whyte-Melville.
     Sign of the Four. By A. Conan Doyle.
     Study in Scarlet. By A. Conan Doyle.
     Silence of Dean Maitland. By Maxwell Grey.
     She. By H. Rider Haggard.
     Toilers of the Sea. By Victor Hugo.
     Tales from Shakespeare. By Charles and Mary Lamb.
     Thelma. By Marie Corelli.
     Treasure Island. By Robert Louis Stevenson.
     Told in the Hills. By Mary Ellis Ryan.
     Three Men in a Boat. By Jerome K. Jerome.
     Tom Brown's School Days. By Thomas Hughes.
     Tom Brown at Oxford. By Thomas Hughes.
     Vanity Fair. By William M. Thackeray.
     White Company. By A. Conan Doyle.
     Wee Willie Winkle. By Rudyard Kipling.

       *       *       *       *       *

             THE GREAT ROUND WORLD
     3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST.    NEW YORK CITY

       *      *       *       *       *

       *       *       *       *       *

     =TO ANY SUBSCRIBER SECURING
      ... FOR US 1 SUBSCRIPTION=


[Illustration: On Honour's Roll
Tales of Heroes in the
Nineteenth Century]

    =WE WILL SEND POST-PAID ANY ONE OF THE FOLLOWING BOOKS=

THE STORY OF THE INDIAN MUTINY.= By Ascott R. Hope. 4 illustrations.
12mo.

=THE ORCHID SEEKERS.= A Story of Adventure in Borneo. By Ashmore Russan
and Frederick Boyle. Illustrated. 8vo.

=UNDER MANY FLAGS.= Stories of Scottish Adventurers. By Davenport Adams.
Illustrated. 12 mo.

=THE FUR TRADERS OF THE WEST= or, =The Doones of Fowey=. By E.R.
Suppling. 21 full-page illustrations. 8vo.

=LOST IN AFRICA.= A Book of Adventure. By Frederick Whishaw. With
full-page illustrations. 8vo.

=THE DAYS OF BRUCE.= A Story from Scottish History. By Grace Aguilar.
Illustrated. 8vo.

=THE DESERT SHIP.= A Story of Adventure by Sea and Land. By John
Bloundelle-Burton. Illustrated. 8vo.

=NUTTALL'S STANDARD DICTIONARY.= Compiled by the Rev. James Wood.
Illustrated. 8vo. 832 pages.

[Illustration:  The Orchid
Seekers]

=GIRL'S HOME COMPANION.= Edited by Mrs. L. Valentine. Illustrated. 8vo.
Contains full description of indoor and outdoor games and valuable
information concerning embroidery, sewing, and all other occupations and
accomplishments for girls.

=LEGENDS OF KING ARTHUR AND HIS KNIGHTS.= By J.T. Knowells. 8vo.

=ON HONOUR'S ROLL.= Tales of Heroism in the Nineteenth Century. By L.
Valentine. Illustrated. 8vo.

=HARRY RAYMOND.= By Commander Cameron. Illustrated. 8vo.

=WE THREE BOYS.= By L. Valentine. Illustrated. 8vo.

=SEA FIGHTS AND LAND BATTLES.= By Mrs. Valentine. Illustrated. 8vo.

=PUZZLES OLD AND NEW.= By Professor Hoffman. 8vo. With over 500 diagrams
and illustrations.

=MASTERMAN READY.= By Captain Marryatt. Illustrated. 12mo.

=SETTLERS IN CANADA.= By Captain Marryatt. Illustrated. 12mo.

=POOR JACK.= By Captain Marryatt. Illustrated. 12mo.

       *       *       *       *       *

     The above are all cloth-bound, well-made books, and are carefully
     selected for their interest and character....

       *       *       *       *       *

              =The Great Round World=
     =3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST.           NEW YORK CITY=

       *       *       *       *       *

=THE GREAT ROUND WORLD

3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST. NEW YORK CITY=

       *       *       *       *       *

  A Good Agent
    Wanted
  In Every Town
              for
    "The Great Round World"

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE GREAT ROUND
WORLD
AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT.]

    VOL. 1   JULY 21, 1897.   NO. 38

England is preparing to send an expedition into the Soudan to reconquer
the province of Dongola, which was lost during the revolt of the Mahdi
in 1881-85.

Many of you have probably heard all about the Soudan war, in which the
brave General Gordon lost his life. But that you may understand the
matter fully, it will perhaps be as well to go over it again.

The Soudan is a vast tract of land in Africa, the boundaries of which
are not very clearly defined. Roughly speaking, it extends from the
Atlantic Ocean on the west to Abyssinia (King Menelik's country) on the
east; and from the desert of Sahara on the north, southward to the
Guinea Coast and the Congo Basin.

Part of this country was owned by Egypt. If you look at the map you will
see that Egypt borders on the Soudan.

The portion of the Soudan owned by Egypt comprised Lower and Upper
Nubia, the White Nile region, and the territories around the Red Sea and
the Gulf of Aden, Dongola being one of these Soudanese provinces.

Egypt is now a dependency of Turkey, and is ruled by a Khedive, who is a
subject of the Sultan. Egypt pays a yearly tribute to Turkey.

In 1859 the building of the Suez Canal was begun. This canal extends
across the Isthmus of Suez, and connects the Mediterranean Sea with the
Red Sea, opening a waterway between Europe and Asia.

To accomplish the enormous task of building the canal it was necessary
to have a great deal of money.

France subscribed one-half, and the Khedive of Egypt the other half.

But Egypt was not rich enough to advance such a large sum, so after a
while the Khedive sold the shares he owned in the Suez Canal Company to
the British Government, and the canal was then owned half by England and
half by France.

Having such a heavy financial interest in the country (the cost of the
canal was about one hundred million dollars), both England and France
were anxious to have some control of the government of Egypt to prevent
any legislation that might be hurtful to the development of their
enterprise.

For some years England and France exercised a joint supervision over
Egypt, but later it was arranged so that England assumed sole charge.

Much was done by England to develop the natural resources of the
country, and all went well until the rebellion of the Mahdi in 1881.

The Mahdi claimed to be a Moslem prophet.

The prevailing religion of Egypt and its provinces is Mohammedanism.

Now the Mohammedans believe that a great prophet, or Mahdi, will come to
lead them. Under his generalship they expect to gain possession of the
whole world.

More than one ambitious man has come forward and claimed to be the
Mahdi.

Whenever such a leader has appeared the people have flocked to his
standard, and through blind faith that success must attend their cause
under his leadership, have done some brave deeds.

The most important of all the Mahdis was the chief who came forward in
1881, declared himself to be the long-expected prophet, called the
people to his standard, and, taking the field against the British and
Egyptian troops, overthrew the Egyptian power in the Soudan.

At first the rising of this new Mahdi was not considered serious, but
after a time the rebellion assumed such serious proportions that it
became evident that Egypt alone could no longer hold her provinces in
the Soudan.

She appealed to England for help, and in 1884 the famous General Gordon
was sent out by the British Government to help the Khedive.

There were many military posts scattered throughout the Soudan, and the
object of General Gordon's mission was to relieve these garrisons, and
withdraw them safely from the troubled territory.

General Gordon was known as "Chinese" Gordon, on account of a brilliant
campaign he made in China, for which he was decorated with the yellow
jacket and peacock feather by the Emperor of China. He was chosen to go
to the aid of the Khedive because he had had long experience in Egypt,
having been in the service of the Khedive as Governor-General of the
Provinces of the Equator from 1874 to 1876, and of the Soudan from 1877
to 1879.

The story of the stand he made against the forces of the Mahdi at
Khartoum, and of the long-delayed expedition which was sent to his
relief, are among the saddest annals of modern history.

Khartoum was the capital of the Soudan, and an important commercial
center.

General Gordon was forced to make a stand here against the Mahdi, and
was besieged in Khartoum from March, 1884, to January, 1885. The city
which had held out so bravely was at last taken by storm and General
Gordon killed. The relief expedition which he had been expecting and
hoping for arrived just two days after the city had fallen.

With the fall of Khartoum the Egyptian power in the Soudan was
overthrown.

Lord Wolseley made a campaign against the Mahdi's forces, but it was too
late.

The Soudanese were lost to Egypt. A strong effort is now being made to
reconquer them.

The British officers in the Egyptian army have been ordered back to
duty, and it is said that action will be taken in a few weeks. It is
expected that the Mahdists will fight to the death, but they will not be
as powerful this time as they were before, as they are now no longer
united. The tribes south of Khartoum are in open revolt against the
Mahdists, and a part of their forces will have to be detached to quell
them.

       *       *       *       *       *

The news from India is still very discouraging.

A fresh outbreak has occurred on the outskirts of Calcutta. Eight
thousand workers employed in the silk mills on the Hoogly River have
started for Calcutta to help the rioters.

The troops at Barrakpur, fifteen miles north of Calcutta, have been
ordered out to intercept the strikers, and prevent their advance upon
the city. They are also carefully guarding the bridges which span the
Hoogly River. This river is one of the mouths of the Ganges.

While the immediate cause of the outbreak was the quarrel over the
mosques, about which we told you last week, it seems that the anger
against Europeans is really due to the measures which have been taken to
stamp out the plague.

In India there are many races of people who, while they all live under
the same rule, have each their own special habits and customs.

These curious customs are rigidly observed. Some must not drink milk,
some must not touch lard, none of them must eat food prepared by persons
who are not of their religion, and many of them must not leave their own
country.

If they neglect these customs they are said to lose caste--which means
that they lose their social position among their special tribe, family,
and friends.

To lose caste is a very serious thing to a native of India.

Europeans are, as a rule, very careful not to offend the natives in
these matters, and are most particular to observe all the customs in
regard to caste. But at the time of the plague it was not possible to
exercise this care.

When human lives were in danger the doctors did not try to find out
what caste sick persons belonged to, but did what they thought best for
them.

We know for ourselves, in our own families, that the rules of the Health
Board in regard to sickness are not always agreeable to us.

We submit to having our invalids taken to hospitals when they have
contagious diseases because we know that we must not endanger other
lives.

Imagine, then, how the ignorant Indian natives must have felt, when, for
reasons that they could not be made to understand, their sick were
carried away by Europeans, and put into hospitals with people of every
tribe and caste, all to be treated alike, and forced to eat the food
prepared by foreigners.

They regarded the vigorous means which the Government took to stop the
plague as a personal cruelty to them, and could not be brought to
realize that everything was being done for their benefit.

Many educated Indians, who were perfectly able to understand that the
Government measures were right and proper, pretended to side with the
people, and, for the sake of stirring up the revolt, published articles
in the papers, and circulated handbills denouncing the wickedness and
cruelty of the British Government.

This course is likely to give England a great deal of trouble, for the
people of India do not love the Europeans.

The telegrams say that there is no reason to fear the overthrow of the
British Empire in India, because there are seventy-five thousand white
troops in the peninsula, and they are fully able to keep order there.

It is thought that the discontent will lead to a series of outbreaks
that will have to be put down by the soldiers, and which will increase
the bitterness already existing between the Europeans and the natives.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Turkish troubles are approaching a crisis.

We told you that the Sultan was doing all in his power to delay matters,
in the hope that something might happen which would relieve the
situation.

The Powers are, however, determined to settle the affair, so, finding
they will submit to no more trifling, the Sultan has been forced to make
a move.

He bade his Minister of Foreign Affairs, Tewfik Pasha, inform the
diplomats that it was useless for them to hold any further meetings, as
he found it impossible to deprive his people of the fruits of their
victory, and so could never agree to relinquish Thessaly.

Tewfik Pasha added that the Porte insisted that the line of the Turkish
frontier should be established along the river Salammria, which would
give Turkey the possession of Thessaly as far south as Larissa.

Having caused this announcement to be made, the Sultan had a circular
prepared and sent to his ambassadors abroad, explaining the situation,
and why he could not accept the frontier line as demanded by the Powers.

It appears that he is convinced that the Powers will not fight him, and
so is determined to defy them and take his own course.

He is said to have remarked that if the Powers could not force Colonel
Vassos and his handful of soldiers to obey them in Crete, it is not
likely that they will be able to coerce the victorious army of Turkey.

The Powers are now entirely of one mind. Turkey must obey their wishes,
and obey them quickly.

On hearing of the Sultan's action, Russia immediately protested, and the
other Powers joined in a collective note to the Turkish Government,
demanding that their terms of peace be complied with.

The note was very severe in its tone, and insisted that the frontier
line between Greece and Turkey should be fixed according to the wishes
of the Powers, and also that the Powers were determined that peace
should be concluded without further delay.

It was at first intended that the note should fix a date by which the
Sultan was bound to send his reply, and should state what the Powers
would do in case their request was refused.

But the note that was sent contained neither of these clauses, and so
the Sultan is not yet convinced that the Powers really mean to fight him
if he remains obstinate.

The Sultan, who seems to be a very wily diplomat, has in the mean while
been trying to find out the individual feelings of the Powers.

He sent notes to the various rulers, asking their friendly assistance in
the settlement of the frontier question.

None of them gave him any encouragement or reason to suppose they would
uphold him in case the matter was brought to an issue.

The Emperor Francis Joseph of Austria, having assured him of his
friendship, advised him, in very plain language, to conclude peace on
the terms dictated by the Powers.

He added: "The concert of the Powers is firm and united in its
decisions. Therefore I request your Majesty to take my advice into
earnest consideration."

The Sultan's great friend, Emperor William of Germany, has also
intimated to him that it would be wise for him to obey the wishes of the
Powers, and not resist the demand for the withdrawal of the Turkish
troops from Thessaly.

The Russian sentiment is also strongly against Turkey. The official
newspaper of St. Petersburg utters a warning to the Sultan that if he
remains obstinate, the Powers will resort to decided measures to enforce
obedience to their commands.

France has sent him a very decided refusal to interfere in the matter.

All this time Turkey has been pushing her war preparations forward, and
is ready to take prompt action in case the peace negotiations should
fall through; indeed, the Turks have already recommenced hostilities.

Two thousand Turks besieged the town of Kalabaka in Thessaly, the Greeks
defending the place until they were overpowered.

A great number of the inhabitants fled to the mountains for safety, but
those who were not fortunate enough to escape were cruelly massacred by
the enemy.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Powers have agreed upon the conditions for self-government in Crete.

A Christian Governor is to be appointed and an annual tribute of $50,000
is to be paid to Turkey.

The payment of the tribute will not be commenced until five years have
passed, because Crete has been so laid waste by the war that she will
not be in a position to pay her tribute until she has had time to
recover.

The foreign troops are to remain on the island until a Cretan militia
has been organized. This militia is to be commanded by European
officers.

The Turkish troops that remain on the island are to be gradually
withdrawn as peace is restored.

The Governor is to have the right to appoint and dismiss all government
officials.

The Assembly, which will manage the affairs of the island, is to be
composed of an equal number of Christians and Mohammedans.

The affairs of Crete seem thus to be happily settled. It is to be hoped
that brave little Greece, who so recklessly went to her aid, may fare as
well.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is a report from Havana that General Weyler has at last been
recalled to Spain. It has not so far been confirmed, and so may not be
true, but it states that the Spanish Government, disgusted with Weyler's
failure to pacify Santiago de Cuba, has determined to recall him.

Weyler is said to have declared that to conquer the rebellion he will
need 200,000 more soldiers, and a fresh supply of money amounting to
$200,000,000.

President Canovas, however, merely promises that in case the Spanish
army suffers very severely in the rainy season, he will send 20.000 men
in October "to inflict a final blow on the insurgents."

The report from Madrid says that General Ramon Blanco will be Weyler's
successor, and that the fact of the latter's recall will be publicly
announced as soon as he returns to Havana.

We told you last week that the Cubans were continuing their military
operations despite the rainy season.

It is now stated on good authority that the long-threatened attack on
Havana is to be made at last.

It is said that orders have been sent to the insurgent generals to
concentrate their forces in Matanzas province, and, if all goes well, to
advance on Havana.

It appears that the Cubans are making the weather their ally.

Accustomed as they are to the country and its climate, it is possible
for them to move their forces despite the muddy roads and the frequent
downpours of rain.

The Spanish soldiers, weakened by the fevers of the island, are in no
condition to withstand these hardships, and every march they make causes
them as heavy a loss as an engagement would.

The Cubans are perfectly aware of this fact and are using it to their
own advantage.

There was a report during the week that General Gomez was hemmed in by a
Spanish column near Sancti Spiritus, and was in great danger. It was
further stated that several of the rebel bands hurried to their chief's
aid as soon as they heard of his peril.

There would appear to have been little truth in these rumors, for he is
reliably reported to be advancing on Havana.

A story has reached us about a certain swamp in Matanzas province, which
the Cubans used a great deal in the early part of the war, but have
since been obliged to abandon for want of a guide to lead them through
it.

This swamp is remarkable for the many beautiful and healthful spots that
are situated in its interior, notwithstanding that it is surrounded by
almost impassable bogs.

The entrance to the swamp is so little known that in the whole Cuban
army there was but one man who could guide the insurgents through its
intricacies to safety.

This man, Colonel Matagas, had lived in the swamp for many years, and
was thoroughly familiar with it.

He was, however, killed in battle, and after his death the Cubans
abandoned all idea of using the swamp.

The insurgents have lately been joined by a South American named Avelino
Rosas, to whom General Gomez confided the leadership of a portion of the
army.

This man set himself to learn the secret of the swamp, and after much
patient work discovered it. He immediately devised a means of putting it
to military use, and has besides established a number of Cuban hospitals
in its depths, confident that they will there be safe from molestation
by the Spaniards.

The insurgents are showing such extreme activity that some stirring
action may be looked for ere long.

We must not expect a pitched battle, for the insurgents are too wise to
attempt to face the enormous force of Spain in a decisive engagement.
They have been highly successful in their plan of harassing detachments
of the Spanish army while on the march, destroying supplies, capturing
outposts, and thwarting the plans of its leaders.

Captain-General Weyler has decided to give up the town of Bayamo in
Santiago de Cuba. He has ordered the inhabitants to move to the town of
Manzanillo, and has asked permission of the war department to burn
Bayamo to the ground.

His reason for giving up Bayamo is that there is so much sickness among
the troops in Santiago that they are not equal to the strain of checking
the activity of the rebels and holding the town.

We have already told you how the rebels intercept every train of
supplies that is despatched to the outlying cities, and it is easy to
believe that the Spaniards have no light task in trying to hold these
towns.

You will be glad to know that the crimes against the unfortunate
soldiers are not to be allowed to go unpunished.

We told you of the shameful system of robbery that prevailed in the
Spanish army; how the unprincipled officers took the money apportioned
by the Government for the soldiers' food, and, pocketing one-half of it,
kept the poor fellows on the short rations they could purchase with the
other half.

Two hundred Spanish officers and contractors for the army are now
imprisoned at the fortress of La Cabana in Havana, under charges of
fraud in provisioning the army.

Among these men are some of the highest officers: Colonels,
Lieutenant-Colonels, Majors, and Captains.

The amount stolen by these men during the two years of the war is
estimated at several millions. The truth of this wholesale robbery came
to light when the soldiers protested against the bad food that was being
given them. When they found their complaints were being unheeded they
deserted in large numbers to the Cubans.

General Weyler then ordered the arrest of the robbers, and, as we have
said, some two hundred Spaniards were accordingly imprisoned.

The Cubans have of late acquired so much war material through various
successful filibustering expeditions that they now have more arms than
soldiers for the insurgent army.

We told you some time ago that General Gomez had said that he could
nearly double his force if he had weapons to put in the hands of the
thousands who volunteered to join him, but that he had been obliged to
refuse many of the men who flocked to his standard because he could not
arm them. Now, however, that the situation has changed, a circular has
been issued from the revolutionary headquarters, calling upon every
insurgent at work in the towns to come and join the army.

The announcement also asks all Cuban sympathizers to be ready to assist
the insurgents in case they attack the towns.

This appears to have had a very good effect as far as the insurgents are
concerned, for volunteers are hurrying to the Cuban camp in great
numbers.

A report from Spain says that an uprising in Alicante is feared.
Alicante is a seaport on the south-east coast of Spain.

The trouble is on account of the new war taxes which the Government has
levied and to which the people are much opposed.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Tariff Bill has been passed by the Senate.

It was passed on July 7th by a majority of ten. Thirty-eight Senators
voted for the bill, and twenty-eight against it.

There was great excitement in the Senate Chamber during the closing
debate on this bill.

It had been expected that a vote would be reached on the 7th, and so the
members of the House of Representatives flocked into the Senate Chamber
during the entire day.

The Tariff Bill was taken up at 11:15 in the morning and at 4:15 P.M. it
was finally passed.

Mr. Allen, of Nebraska, offered an amendment declaring all combinations
and contracts to restrict labor unlawful, but his motion was lost, and
there is no clause against Trusts in the new bill.

After it had passed, a joint conference was called, and the
Vice-President appointed eight Senators to take part in the discussion
on behalf of the Senate.

This conference is to settle with the House of Representatives the
changes that the Senate has made in the bill.

You remember that the Dingley Tariff Bill was passed by the House of
Representatives before it was sent to the Senate.

Now the Tariff Bill, as it stands to-day, differs in many respects from
the bill as it was received by the Senate. It has therefore been found
necessary to call a conference of members of both Houses to discuss
these points of difference, and arrive at some conclusion in regard to
them.

The Senate's version of the Tariff Bill will be copied and sent to the
House at once. It has been agreed that it shall be handed over to the
members of the conference without being first discussed in the House.

The Senators who are opposed to the bill declare that it is the worst
ever framed, while those who favor it insist that it is going to bring
back prosperity.

       *       *       *       *       *

The latest news from the Sandwich Islands is that Hawaii has offered to
arbitrate the immigration matter.

The Japanese minister has, however, stated that he does not think his
Government will ever consent to arbitration, and so it is not likely the
difficulty will be settled by that means.

Feeling is running very high in Honolulu. There have been some
unfortunate conflicts between Americans and Japanese there.

It is reported that an American lady has been severely beaten while
trying to assist her brother, who had been attacked by a number of men
from the warship _Naniwa_.

While walking in the town with her brother, this lady encountered two
sailors, who stood in her way and would not make room for her to pass.
Her brother pushed the men aside, whereupon they turned on him and began
to beat him.

When she endeavored to help her brother the Japanese sailors beat her
unmercifully.

The discussion between the United States and Japan seems no nearer a
peaceable settlement.

The Secretary of State has made public the official grounds for Japan's
protest.

They are:

_First_, that it is necessary for Hawaii to remain an independent state,
in order to preserve a good understanding between the Powers that have
interests in the Pacific Ocean.

_Second_, that annexation will endanger the rights which Japan has
acquired through her various treaties and contracts with Hawaii.

_Third_, that annexation might lead to the postponement by Hawaii of the
settlement of claims which Japan already has against her.

In Hawaii there is a strong desire that the Senate shall ratify the
treaty immediately, and put an end to all further question on the
subject.

Hawaii mistrusts Japan, and fears that she will do something to prevent
annexation unless our Government is prompt.

It is rumored in Washington that Japan and Spain are forming an alliance
to embarrass the United States in her dealings with both Hawaii and
Cuba.

It is felt that speedy action may be the best thing to prevent
complications.

The Government is seriously considering the advisability of sending
another ship to Honolulu. It is possible that the battleship _Oregon_
and the gunboat _Concord_ may both be sent to Hawaii.

The Navy Department realizes that annexation will necessitate a largely
increased navy, and Secretary Long will ask Congress to arrange for the
building of more cruisers and torpedo-boats.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the occasion of the British naval review at Spithead, an illustration
was given of the short time it takes to turn a merchant vessel into an
armed cruiser.

England, despite her large navy, often has use for more ships than she
possesses.

To meet this demand she has placed a certain number of merchant vessels
on her Naval Reserve list. By this arrangement the Government has the
right to call out any of these ships when she has need for them.

At the time of the great naval review it was thought that it would be a
good thing to put this system to a test, and so several of the Naval
Reserve merchantmen were ordered to fit out as gunboats.

One of the vessels thus put into use was the _Teutonic_ of the White
Star line, one of the regular ocean steamers that ply between England
and America.

She arrived in Liverpool on June 21st, and immediately received orders
to transform herself into a war-vessel, and take her place in the naval
review at Spithead.

As soon as her passengers and freight had been landed her crew set to
work to take her war supplies on board.

A British naval officer had been sent from Portsmouth to superintend the
work, and under his direction magazines and armories were arranged, gun
platforms were built, and sixteen guns were taken on board and mounted.

In the crew of the _Teutonic_ were some fifty sailors who were members
of the British Naval Reserve. To them rifles and cutlasses were
supplied, and they in their turn were transformed into regular
man-of-war's men.

The rest of the crew was made up from sailors drafted from other
warships, and then the _Teutonic_ was ready to take her place in the
great Jubilee naval parade.

So fine an appearance did she make that she was put at the head of one
of the seven lines of vessels in the review, and Captain Cameron, her
commander, received a flattering letter from the flag-officer of his
division, congratulating him upon having the neatest merchant vessel in
the parade.

It took just forty hours to change the _Teutonic_ from a merchantman
into a war-vessel.

Captain Cameron is highly delighted at the praise he received. He also
is a member of the Naval Reserve, having the rank of lieutenant.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sandy Hook, which is the first point of land sighted in entering New
York Harbor, has been again converted into an island.

This strip of beach is a continuation of the New Jersey coast. The
curious thing about it is that it has never been definitely settled
whether it is a peninsula or an island, as it is continually changing
its character.

The first mention of the Hook, says a writer in one of our current
journals, appears in the diary of Robert Juet, who was the companion of
Hudson during his third voyage in 1609. It was then an island.

On maps and charts in the possession of the New York Historical Society
it is represented both as an island and a peninsula.

It was certainly an island in revolutionary times, for when Lord Howe
retreated from the battle of Monmouth by the Navesink road he built a
bridge to Sandy Hook Island.

Twice during the last century it has tried to get away from the
mainland.

In 1870, the New Jersey Southern Railway laid a track along the west
beach for a distance of three miles.

This trestle is now the only connecting link between the island and the
mainland, the water for more than a year having been washing away the
neck of land which joined Sandy Hook to the coast-line.

The War Department owns part of the Hook. A proving-ground for guns,
armor, etc., has been established there.

The Assistant Secretary of War has sent word to Speaker Reed asking that
a joint resolution be passed to enable the Department to protect its
property.

An appropriation of $75,000 was set aside some time ago to repair the
breach made by the sea at the Hook, but the work could not be commenced
until certain laws had been complied with, and the consent of New Jersey
had been secured, or Congress had passed a resolution instructing the
War Department to proceed with the work.

It will be a great advantage to the Government to close the inlet, as
the heavy guns can then be transferred to the proving-grounds on the
Hook by a railroad built on solid ground, and not liable to give way
under their extreme weight.

The property-owners in the neighborhood, however, are anxious that the
inlet should remain open, as they say that the Shrewsbury River has been
some two feet deeper since the Hook became an island, the boating and
fishing have much improved, and, above all, the current has become so
much stronger that the river can now drain itself, and has become much
healthier in consequence.

The Secretary of War has been asked to give the matter his careful
consideration before he allows the work of closing the inlet to be
commenced.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our Government has had cause to complain of England in reference to the
seal question.

It seems that Great Britain makes hardly any effort to stop the
destruction of the seals, maintaining but two vessels in Bering Sea,
while the United States maintains five.

We have lately had some correspondence with England on the seal
question, but it has not been made public for fear of causing bad
feeling.

Mr. Foster, who, as we told you, has been on a special mission to London
and St. Petersburg to arrange the dispute, has met with a friendly
reception in Russia. He hopes that the success of his mission in St.
Petersburg may induce Great Britain to look favorably on it also.

It is desired that all the countries interested in the matter shall send
delegates to a conference to be held in Washington in October.

At the conference it is intended to discuss the whole subject anew and
make fresh arrangements.

The difficulty has been that the Treaty of Paris is still in operation,
and Great Britain is not willing to open the matter until the treaty has
expired.

The Canadian sealers are much averse to the plan of branding the seals.
We told you about this a few weeks ago.

Professor Starr Jordan, who is passing through Victoria on his way to
the Seal Islands, there to recommence the work of branding, has met with
a very cold reception from the sealers.

Professor Jordan has taken with him an electric outfit for branding,
which will do the work more quickly and effectually than the old method.

       *       *       *       *       *

We have to record more labor troubles.

The coal miners in the United States have gone on strike, in obedience
to the order of the United Mine Workers of America.

The cause of this strike is that wages have been so reduced that the
miners can no longer earn enough to support themselves.

The men declare that the strike has been forced upon them by the poor
pay they have received, and that they have been expecting and preparing
for it for some time past.

They hope to make the strike general, and that it shall be the biggest
ever known.

The miners all over the country have been ordered to quit work, and it
is expected that they will do so.

The men in West Virginia at first refused, but the latest reports are
that they are gradually falling in line with the rest.

In many districts the miners have been offered the price they ask if
they will only go back to work. They have invariably refused, saying
that they will not resume work until the better rate of wages is made
general in all the mines.

There is danger of a coal famine if the strike lasts very long.

Several of the Western manufacturing cities are already running short of
coal, and though there is plenty at the pit's mouth, the strikers will
not allow it to be handled until their demands are complied with.

Efforts will be made to move this coal, and it is feared that the
strikers will then become violent and riotous. Up to the present time
they have been very peaceable.

The Governor of Indiana has asked the Governors of Ohio, Illinois, and
Pennsylvania to meet him, and discuss plans for arbitrating the
difficulty.

England also has her labor troubles. A great strike is going on in
London among the engineers.

It is a struggle for an eight-hour working day.

The men do not insist that they shall only work eight hours a day, but
that eight hours shall be considered the full day's labor, and all the
work they do over that shall be regarded as overtime, and paid for.

The strikers have a large fund in reserve to fall back upon, from which
they will each receive a certain weekly sum to give them the necessaries
of life until the trouble is adjusted.

The fight promises to be a long and bitter one, for the employers
declare that they must hold out till they win, as defeat means ruin to
them.

The ship-building trade will be the one most seriously affected by the
strike.

                                                       G.H. ROSENFELD.




INVENTION AND DISCOVERY.


DETACHABLE SHELVING FOR WINDOWS.--The scent and the sight of flowers are
the source of so much enjoyment to most persons, and the means of
keeping them in our houses, as a rule, is such a puzzle, that the
"detachable shelving for windows" ought to find favor with everybody,
young or old.

This shelving is an apparently simple arrangement of three shelves
connected by strong braces running from one to another, and attached to
the sides of the window in two places by screw-eyes and nuts which are
securely fastened in the outer frame of the window. Simple as it
appears, it is very ingeniously contrived, and forms a most desirable
substitute for the window-ledge itself, which is seldom wide enough for
flower-pots to stand on with any degree of safety.


STATION-INDICATOR.--We remember once travelling in the winter in almost
the last car of a long train, where we could not see the names of the
stations; the conductor shouted out the stopping-places in a way not
easy to understand, and we had no time-table and did not know when the
train was due. It was the most uncomfortable journey it is possible to
imagine. A station-indicator in each car would forever prevent the
recurrence of such discomfort and anxiety. Curiously enough, two have
been invented within six months; the later one has an endless roll with
the names of all the stations on the route, and, by the movement of a
simple bar, after passing one station the name of the next one appears
in its place.

       *       *       *       *       *

SIMPLE LESSONS IN THE

STUDY OF NATURE

By I.G. OAKLEY


This is a handy little book, which many a teacher who is looking for means
to offer children genuine nature study may be thankful to get hold of.

Nature lessons, to be entitled to that name, must deal with what can be
handled and scrutinized at leisure by the child, pulled apart, and even
wasted. This can be done with the objects discussed in this book; they are
under the feet of childhood--grass, feathers, a fallen leaf, a budding
twig, or twisted shell; these things cannot be far out of the way, even
within the stony limits of a city.

Nor are the lessons haphazard dashes at the nearest living thing; on the
contrary, they are virtually fundamental, whether with respect to their
relation to some of the classified sciences, or with reference to the
development of thought and power of expression in the child himself.

The illustrations are few, and scarcely more than figures; it is not meant
to be a pretty picture-book, yet is most clearly and beautifully printed
and arranged, for its material is to be that out of which pictures are
made. It will be found full of suggestions of practical value to teachers
who are carrying the miscellaneous work of ungraded schools, and who have
the unspeakable privilege of dealing with their pupils untrammelled by
cast-iron methods and account-keeping examination records.

    =_Sample copy, 50 Cents, post-paid_=

       *       *       *       *       *

    =WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON
    3 & 5 W. 18th St. . . . New York City=


      =KLEMMS'=
=RELIEF PRACTICE MAPS.=

       *       *       *       *       *

=LIST OF MAPS.=

    Small size, 9-1/2 x 11 { Plain,                       5 cents each.
                           { With Waterproofed surface   10   "    "

    Europe, Asia, Africa; North America, South America, East Central
    States, New England, Middle Atlantic States, South Atlantic
    States, Palestine, Australia.


    Large size, 10 x 15 { Plain,                     10 cents each.
                        { With Waterproofed Surface, 15   "     "

    United States, British Isles, Roman Empire, Western Europe,
    North America, South America, Asia.

    (POSTAGE ON SINGLE MAPS, 5 CENTS.)

       *       *       *       *       *

"I would advise =Sunday-school teachers= to use, in connection with the
lessons of 1897, =Klemm's Relief Map of the Roman Empire=. Every scholar
who can draw should have a copy of it. Being blank, it can be beautifully
colored: waters, blue; mountains, brown; valleys, green; deserts, yellow;
cities marked with pin-holes; and the journeys of Paul can be traced upon
it."--MRS. WILBUR F. CRAFTS, _President International Union of
Primary Sabbath-School Teachers of the United States_.

       *       *       *       *       *

=DESCRIPTION OF THE MAPS.=

These maps are made in two forms, both with beautifully executed relief
(embossed)--the cheaper ones of plain stiff paper similar to drawing paper
(these are to be substituted for and used as outline map blanks), the
others covered with a durable waterproof surface, that can be quickly
cleaned with a damp sponge, adapted to receive a succession of markings
and cleansings. Oceans, lakes, and rivers, as well as land, appear in the
same color, white, so as to facilitate the use of the map as a
=_geographical slate_=.

       *       *       *       *       *

    =WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON
    _3 & 5 W. 18th St. ... New York City_=


       *       *       *       *       *


                          =TO ANY ONE SENDING US=

                                 =...3...=
                              New Subscribers

[Illustration: Book-Rest]


                                              OAK
                     WE WILL SEND A           WALNUT
                   =Lambie Book-Rest=     IN  CHERRY
                                              JAPANNED
                                              OR BRONZED

     This book-rest holds the book in any position and at any slant, so
     that you can shift the book when you change your position as freely
     as you can move your hand. Can be made fast to chair, table, or
     lounge on either side.

                      A VERY USEFUL AND CONVENIENT THING

=And for 5 Subscribers a=

=Lambie Dictionary-Holder=

     Can be used for any dictionary or large book. Keeps book open or
     shut, as desired. Holder carries the weight and you handle it as if
     it weighed nothing. Revolves, and is on castors. Can be drawn to
     you with one hand. Can be raised or lowered.

=IN OAK, WALNUT, OR CHERRY
JAPANNED OR BRONZED....=

[Illustration: Dictionary Holder]

               THE GREAT ROUND WORLD
     3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST.  NEW YORK CITY

       *       *       *       *       *



     TO ANY ONE SENDING US

     [Illustration: Gold-plated Watch]

     =4= [Illustration: Flourish]
         =New=
         =Subscriptions=

     WE WILL SEND
     EXPRESS PAID

     A stem-wind, stem-set, nickel movement, jewelled balances,
     porcelain dial, highly finished throughout

     =Gold-Plated=
        =Watch=

     EITHER OPEN FACE OR HUNTING CASE. ENGINE-TURNED (AS SHOWN IN CUT)
     OR WITH A HANDSOME ENGRAVED DESIGN ON CASE.

[Illustration: Divider]

These watches are made in one of the best-known American factories, are
not clocks but real watches, and are _warranted_ to keep time
accurately.

[Illustration: Divider]

            THE GREAT ROUND WORLD
     3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST.  NEW YORK CITY

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration:
     WOODEN PUTTER
     BRASSIE SPOON
     BRASSIE NIBLICK
     DRIVER
     CLEEK
     IRON
     LOFTING IRON
     MASHIE
     NIBLICK
     IRON PUTTER]

     =To any one sending us 2 new subscribers=

     we will send, express paid, any one of the golf sticks shown in
     cut...

=These are the most approved shapes and styles and are made in the best
possible manner=

       *       *       *       *       *

     =2= special golf balls may be had for
                   ... =1= new subscription

       *       *       *       *       *

     =THE GREAT ROUND WORLD=
     =3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST. NEW YORK CITY=

       *       *       *       *       *

=PREMIUM LIST=

    In connection with our offer of any BICYCLE you wish for 100 new
    subscriptions, we have prepared a

=Premium Catalogue=

    This contains a list of selected articles which will be given to
    those who may obtain a smaller number of subscriptions

       *       *       *       *       *

Those who fail to secure the necessary number for the bicycle may make
selection from this catalogue.


       *       *       *       *       *

    =Copy mailed on receipt of 5c.=

       *       *       *       *       *

    =THE GREAT ROUND WORLD=
    =3 & 5 West 18th St, New York City=





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is
Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 38, July 29, 1897, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD AND ***

***** This file should be named 16139.txt or 16139.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/6/1/3/16139/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.(www.pgdp.net)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

