The Project Gutenberg EBook of Captain Rogers, by W.W. Jacobs

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Captain Rogers
       The Lady of the Barge and Others, Part 7.

Author: W.W. Jacobs

Release Date: April 22, 2004 [EBook #12127]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CAPTAIN ROGERS ***




Produced by David Widger




THE LADY OF THE BARGE

AND OTHER STORIES

By W. W. Jacobs




CAPTAIN ROGERS


A man came slowly over the old stone bridge, and averting his gaze from
the dark river with its silent craft, looked with some satisfaction
toward the feeble lights of the small town on the other side.  He walked
with the painful, forced step of one who has already trudged far.  His
worsted hose, where they were not darned, were in holes, and his coat and
knee-breeches were rusty with much wear, but he straightened himself as
he reached the end of the bridge and stepped out bravely to the taverns
which stood in a row facing the quay.

He passed the "Queen Anne"--a mere beershop--without pausing, and after a
glance apiece at the "Royal George" and the "Trusty Anchor," kept on his
way to where the "Golden Key" hung out a gilded emblem.  It was the best
house in Riverstone, and patronized by the gentry, but he adjusted his
faded coat, and with a swaggering air entered and walked boldly into the
coffee-room.

The room was empty, but a bright fire afforded a pleasant change to the
chill October air outside.  He drew up a chair, and placing his feet on
the fender, exposed his tattered soles to the blaze, as a waiter who had
just seen him enter the room came and stood aggressively inside the door.

"Brandy and water," said the stranger; "hot."

"The coffee-room is for gentlemen staying in the house," said the waiter.

The stranger took his feet from the fender, and rising slowly, walked
toward him.  He was a short man and thin, but there was something so
menacing in his attitude, and something so fearsome in his stony brown
eyes, that the other, despite his disgust for ill-dressed people, moved
back uneasily.

"Brandy and water, hot," repeated the stranger; "and plenty of it.  D'ye
hear?"

The man turned slowly to depart.

"Stop!" said the other, imperiously.  "What's the name of the landlord
here?"

"Mullet," said the fellow, sulkily.

"Send him to me," said the other, resuming his seat; "and hark you, my
friend, more civility, or 'twill be the worse for you."

He stirred the log on the fire with his foot until a shower of sparks
whirled up the chimney.  The door opened, and the landlord, with the
waiter behind him, entered the room, but he still gazed placidly at the
glowing embers.

"What do you want?"  demanded the landlord, in a deep voice.

The stranger turned a little weazened yellow face and grinned at him
familiarly.

"Send that fat rascal of yours away," he said, slowly.

The landlord started at his voice and eyed him closely; then he signed to
the man to withdraw, and closing the door behind him, stood silently
watching his visitor.

"You didn't expect to see me, Rogers," said the latter.

"My name's Mullet," said the other, sternly.  "What do you want?"

"Oh, Mullet?" said the other, in surprise.  "I'm afraid I've made a
mistake, then.  I thought you were my old shipmate, Captain Rogers.  It's
a foolish mistake of mine, as I've no doubt Rogers was hanged years ago.
You never had a brother named Rogers, did you?"

"I say again, what do you want?"  demanded the other, advancing upon him.

"Since you're so good," said the other.  "I want new clothes, food, and
lodging of the best, and my pockets filled with money."

"You had better go and look for all those things, then," said Mullet.
"You won't find them here."

"Ay!"  said the other, rising.  "Well, well--There was a hundred guineas
on the head of my old shipmate Rogers some fifteen years ago.  I'll see
whether it has been earned yet."

"If I gave you a hundred guineas," said the innkeeper, repressing his
passion by a mighty effort, "you would not be satisfied."

"Reads like a book," said the stranger, in tones of pretended delight.
"What a man it is!"

He fell back as he spoke, and thrusting his hand into his pocket, drew
forth a long pistol as the innkeeper, a man of huge frame, edged toward
him.

"Keep your distance," he said, in a sharp, quick voice.

The innkeeper, in no wise disturbed at the pistol, turned away calmly,
and ringing the bell, ordered some spirits.  Then taking a chair, he
motioned to the other to do the same, and they sat in silence until the
staring waiter had left the room again.  The stranger raised his glass.

"My old friend Captain Rogers," he said, solemnly, "and may he never get
his deserts!"

"From what jail have you come?"  inquired Mullet, sternly.

"'Pon my soul," said the other, "I have been in so many--looking for
Captain Rogers--that I almost forget the last, but I have just tramped
from London, two hundred and eighty odd miles, for the pleasure of seeing
your damned ugly figure-head again; and now I've found it, I'm going to
stay.  Give me some money."

The innkeeper, without a word, drew a little gold and silver from his
pocket, and placing it on the table, pushed it toward him.

"Enough to go on with," said the other, pocketing it; "in future it is
halves.  D'ye hear me?  Halves!  And I'll stay here and see I get it."

He sat back in his chair, and meeting the other's hatred with a gaze as
steady as his own, replaced his pistol.

"A nice snug harbor after our many voyages," he continued.  "Shipmates we
were, shipmates we'll be; while Nick Gunn is alive you shall never want
for company.  Lord!  Do you remember the Dutch brig, and the fat
frightened mate?"

"I have forgotten it," said the other, still eyeing him steadfastly.
"I have forgotten many things.  For fifteen years I have lived a decent,
honest life.  Pray God for your own sinful soul, that the devil in me
does not wake again."

"Fifteen years is a long nap," said Gunn, carelessly; "what a godsend it
'll be for you to have me by you to remind you of old times!  Why, you're
looking smug, man; the honest innkeeper to the life!  Gad! who's the
girl?"

[Illustration: GUNN PLACED A HAND, WHICH LACKED TWO FINGERS ON HIS BREAST
AND BOWED AGAIN.]

He rose and made a clumsy bow as a girl of eighteen, after a moment's
hesitation at the door, crossed over to the innkeeper.

"I'm busy, my dear," said the latter, somewhat sternly.

"Our business," said Gunn, with another bow, "is finished.  Is this your
daughter, Rog-- Mullet?"

"My stepdaughter," was the reply.

Gunn placed a hand, which lacked two fingers, on his breast, and bowed
again.

"One of your father's oldest friends," he said smoothly; "and fallen on
evil days; I'm sure your gentle heart will be pleased to hear that your
good father has requested me--for a time--to make his house my home."

"Any friend of my father's is welcome to me, sir," said the girl, coldly.
She looked from the innkeeper to his odd-looking guest, and conscious of
something strained in the air, gave him a little bow and quitted the
room.

"You insist upon staying, then?"  said Mullet, after a pause.

"More than ever," replied Gunn, with a leer toward the door.  "Why, you
don't think I'm _afraid,_ Captain?  You should know me better than that."

"Life is sweet," said the other.

"Ay," assented Gunn, "so sweet that you will share things with me to keep
it."

"No," said the other, with great calm.  "I am man enough to have a better
reason."

"No psalm singing," said Gunn, coarsely.  "And look cheerful, you old
buccaneer.  Look as a man should look who has just met an old friend
never to lose him again."

He eyed his man expectantly and put his hand to his pocket again, but the
innkeeper's face was troubled, and he gazed stolidly at the fire.

"See what fifteen years' honest, decent life does for us," grinned the
intruder.

The other made no reply, but rising slowly, walked to the door without a
word.

"Landlord," cried Gunn, bringing his maimed hand sharply down on the
table.

The innkeeper turned and regarded him.

"Send me in some supper," said Gunn; "the best you have, and plenty of
it, and have a room prepared.  The best."

The door closed silently, and was opened a little later by the dubious
George coming in to set a bountiful repast.  Gunn, after cursing him for
his slowness and awkwardness, drew his chair to the table and made the
meal of one seldom able to satisfy his hunger.  He finished at last, and
after sitting for some time smoking, with his legs sprawled on the
fender, rang for a candle and demanded to be shown to his room.

His proceedings when he entered it were but a poor compliment to his
host.  Not until he had poked and pried into every corner did he close
the door.  Then, not content with locking it, he tilted a chair beneath
the handle, and placing his pistol beneath his pillow, fell fast asleep.

Despite his fatigue he was early astir next morning.  Breakfast was laid
for him in the coffee-room, and his brow darkened.  He walked into the
hall, and after trying various doors entered a small sitting-room, where
his host and daughter sat at breakfast, and with an easy assurance drew a
chair to the table.  The innkeeper helped him without a word, but the
girl's hand shook under his gaze as she passed him some coffee.

"As soft a bed as ever I slept in," he remarked.

"I hope that you slept well," said the girl, civilly.

"Like a child," said Gunn, gravely; "an easy conscience.  Eh, Mullet?"

The innkeeper nodded and went on eating.  The other, after another remark
or two, followed his example, glancing occasionally with warm approval at
the beauty of the girl who sat at the head of the table.

"A sweet girl," he remarked, as she withdrew at the end of the meal; "and
no mother, I presume?"

"No mother," repeated the other.

Gunn sighed and shook his head.

"A sad case, truly," he murmured.  "No mother and such a guardian.  Poor
soul, if she but knew!  Well, we must find her a husband."

He looked down as he spoke, and catching sight of his rusty clothes and
broken shoes, clapped his hand to his pocket; and with a glance at his
host, sallied out to renew his wardrobe.  The innkeeper, with an
inscrutable face, watched him down the quay, then with bent head he
returned to the house and fell to work on his accounts.

In this work Gunn, returning an hour later, clad from head to foot in new
apparel, offered to assist him.  Mullett hesitated, but made no demur;
neither did he join in the ecstasies which his new partner displayed at
the sight of the profits.  Gunn put some more gold into his new pockets,
and throwing himself back in a chair, called loudly to George to bring
him some drink.

In less than a month the intruder was the virtual master of the "Golden
Key."  Resistance on the part of the legitimate owner became more and
more feeble, the slightest objection on his part drawing from the
truculent Gunn dark allusions to his past and threats against his future,
which for the sake of his daughter he could not ignore.  His health began
to fail, and Joan watched with perplexed terror the growth of a situation
which was in a fair way of becoming unbearable.

The arrogance of Gunn knew no bounds.  The maids learned to tremble at
his polite grin, or his worse freedom, and the men shrank appalled from
his profane wrath.  George, after ten years' service, was brutally
dismissed, and refusing to accept dismissal from his hands, appealed to
his master.  The innkeeper confirmed it, and with lack-lustre eyes fenced
feebly when his daughter, regardless of Gunn's presence, indignantly
appealed to him.

"The man was rude to my friend, my dear," he said dispiritedly

"If he was rude, it was because Mr. Gunn deserved it," said Joan, hotly.

Gunn laughed uproariously.

"Gad, my dear, I like you!"  he cried, slapping his leg.  "You're a girl
of spirit.  Now I will make you a fair offer.  If you ask for George to
stay, stay he shall, as a favour to your sweet self."

The girl trembled.

"Who is master here?"  she demanded, turning a full eye on her father.

Mullet laughed uneasily.

"This is business," he said, trying to speak lightly, "and women can't
understand it.  Gunn is--is valuable to me, and George must go."

"Unless you plead for him, sweet one?"  said Gunn.

The girl looked at her father again, but he turned his head away and
tapped on the floor with his foot.  Then in perplexity, akin to tears,
she walked from the room, carefully drawing her dress aside as Gunn held
the door for her.

"A fine girl," said Gunn, his thin lips working; "a fine spirit.  'Twill
be pleasant to break it; but she does not know who is master here."

"She is young yet," said the other, hurriedly.

"I will soon age her if she looks like that at me again," said Gunn.  "By
---, I'll turn out the whole crew into the street, and her with them, an'
I wish it.  I'll lie in my bed warm o' nights and think of her huddled on
a doorstep."

His voice rose and his fists clenched, but he kept his distance and
watched the other warily.  The innkeeper's face was contorted and his
brow grew wet.  For one moment something peeped out of his eyes; the next
he sat down in his chair again and nervously fingered his chin.

"I have but to speak," said Gunn, regarding him with much satisfaction,
"and you will hang, and your money go to the Crown.  What will become of
her then, think you?"

The other laughed nervously.

"'Twould be stopping the golden eggs," he ventured.

"Don't think too much of that," said Gunn, in a hard voice.  "I was never
one to be baulked, as you know."

"Come, come.  Let us be friends," said Mullet; "the girl is young, and
has had her way."

He looked almost pleadingly at the other, and his voice trembled.  Gunn
drew himself up, and regarding him with a satisfied sneer, quitted the
room without a word.

Affairs at the "Golden Key" grew steadily worse and worse.  Gunn
dominated the place, and his vile personality hung over it like a shadow.
Appeals to the innkeeper were in vain; his health was breaking fast, and
he moodily declined to interfere.  Gunn appointed servants of his own
choosing-brazen maids and foul-mouthed men.  The old patrons ceased to
frequent the "Golden Key," and its bedrooms stood empty.  The maids
scarcely deigned to take an order from Joan, and the men spoke to her
familiarly.  In the midst of all this the innkeeper, who had complained
once or twice of vertigo, was seized with a fit.

Joan, flying to him for protection against the brutal advances of Gunn,
found him lying in a heap behind the door of his small office, and in her
fear called loudly for assistance.  A little knot of servants collected,
and stood regarding him stupidly.  One made a brutal jest.  Gunn,
pressing through the throng, turned the senseless body over with his
foot, and cursing vilely, ordered them to carry it upstairs.

Until the surgeon came, Joan, kneeling by the bed, held on to the
senseless hand as her only protection against the evil faces of Gunn and
his proteges.  Gunn himself was taken aback, the innkeeper's death at
that time by no means suiting his aims.

The surgeon was a man of few words and fewer attainments, but under his
ministrations the innkeeper, after a long interval, rallied.  The half-
closed eyes opened, and he looked in a dazed fashion at his surroundings.
Gunn drove the servants away and questioned the man of medicine.  The
answers were vague and interspersed with Latin.  Freedom from noise and
troubles of all kinds was insisted upon and Joan was installed as nurse,
with a promise of speedy assistance.

The assistance arrived late in the day in the shape of an elderly woman,
whose Spartan treatment of her patients had helped many along the silent
road.  She commenced her reign by punching the sick man's pillows, and
having shaken him into consciousness by this means, gave him a dose of
physic, after first tasting it herself from the bottle.

After the first rally the innkeeper began to fail slowly.  It was seldom
that he understood what was said to him, and pitiful to the beholder to
see in his intervals of consciousness his timid anxiety to earn the good-
will of the all-powerful Gunn.  His strength declined until assistance
was needed to turn him in the bed, and his great sinewy hands were
forever trembling and fidgeting on the coverlet.

Joan, pale with grief and fear, tended him assiduously.  Her stepfather's
strength had been a proverb in the town, and many a hasty citizen had
felt the strength of his arm.  The increasing lawlessness of the house
filled her with dismay, and the coarse attentions of Gunn became more
persistent than ever.  She took her meals in the sick-room, and divided
her time between that and her own.

Gunn himself was in a dilemma.  With Mullet dead, his power was at an end
and his visions of wealth dissipated.  He resolved to feather his nest
immediately, and interviewed the surgeon.  The surgeon was ominously
reticent, the nurse cheerfully ghoulish.

"Four days I give him," she said, calmly; "four blessed days, not but
what he might slip away at any moment."

Gunn let one day of the four pass, and then, choosing a time when Joan
was from the room, entered it for a little quiet conversation.  The
innkeeper's eyes were open, and, what was more to the purpose,
intelligent.

"You're cheating the hangman, after all," snarled Gunn.  "I'm off to
swear an information."

The other, by a great effort, turned his heavy head and fixed his wistful
eyes on him.

"Mercy!"  he whispered.  "For her sake--give me--a little time!"

"To slip your cable, I suppose," quoth Gunn.  "Where's your money?
Where's your hoard, you miser?"

Mullet closed his eyes.  He opened them again slowly and strove to think,
while Gunn watched him narrowly.  When he spoke, his utterance was thick
and labored.

"Come to-night," he muttered, slowly.  "Give me--time--I will make your
--your fortune.  But the nurse-watches."

"I'll see to her," said Gunn, with a grin.  "But tell me now, lest you
die first."

"You will--let Joan--have a share?"  panted the innkeeper.

"Yes, yes," said Gunn, hastily.

The innkeeper strove to raise himself in the bed, and then fell back
again exhausted as Joan's step was heard on the stairs.  Gunn gave
a savage glance of warning at him, and barring the progress of the girl
at the door, attempted to salute her.  Joan came in pale and trembling,
and falling on her knees by the bedside, took her father's hand in hers
and wept over it.  The innkeeper gave a faint groan and a shiver ran
through his body.

It was nearly an hour after midnight that Nick Gunn, kicking off his
shoes, went stealthily out onto the landing.  A little light came from
the partly open door of the sick-room, but all else was in blackness.  He
moved along and peered in.

The nurse was siting in a high-backed oak chair by the fire.  She had
slipped down in the seat, and her untidy head hung on her bosom.  A glass
stood on the small oak table by her side, and a solitary candle on the
high mantel-piece diffused a sickly light.  Gunn entered the room, and
finding that the sick man was dozing, shook him roughly.

The innkeeper opened his eyes and gazed at him blankly.

"Wake, you fool," said Gunn, shaking him again.

The other roused and muttered something incoherently.  Then he stirred
slightly.

"The nurse," he whispered.

"She's safe enow," said Gunn.  "I've seen to that."

He crossed the room lightly, and standing before the unconscious woman,
inspected her closely and raised her in the chair.  Her head fell limply
over the arm.

"Dead?" inquired Mullet, in a fearful whisper.

"Drugged," said Gunn, shortly.  "Now speak up, and be lively."

The innkeeper's eyes again travelled in the direction of the nurse.

"The men," he whispered; "the servants."

"Dead drunk and asleep," said Gunn, biting the words.  "The last day
would hardly rouse them.  Now will you speak, damn you!"

"I must--take care--of Joan," said the father.

Gunn shook his clenched hand at him.

"My money--is--is--" said the other.  "Promise me on--your oath--Joan."

"Ay, ay," growled Gunn; "how many more times?  I'll marry her, and she
shall have what I choose to give her.  Speak up, you fool!  It's not for
you to make terms.  Where is it?"

He bent over, but Mullet, exhausted with his efforts, had closed his eyes
again, and half turned his head.

"Where is it, damn you?"  said Gunn, from between his teeth.

Mullet opened his eyes again, glanced fearfully round the room, and
whispered.  Gunn, with a stifled oath, bent his ear almost to his mouth,
and the next moment his neck was in the grip of the strongest man in
Riverstone, and an arm like a bar of iron over his back pinned him down
across the bed.

"You dog!"  hissed a fierce voice in his ear.  "I've got you--Captain
Rogers at your service, and now you may tell his name to all you can.
Shout it, you spawn of hell.  Shout it!"

He rose in bed, and with a sudden movement flung the other over on his
back.  Gunn's eyes were starting from his head, and he writhed
convulsively.

"I thought you were a sharper man, Gunn," said Rogers, still in the same
hot whisper, as he relaxed his grip a little; "you are too simple, you
hound!  When you first threatened me I resolved to kill you.  Then you
threatened my daughter.  I wish that you had nine lives, that I might
take them all.  Keep still!"

He gave a half-glance over his shoulder at the silent figure of the
nurse, and put his weight on the twisting figure on the bed.

"You drugged the hag, good Gunn," he continued.  "To-morrow morning,
Gunn, they will find you in your room dead, and if one of the scum you
brought into my house be charged with the murder, so much the better.
When I am well they will go.  I am already feeling a little bit stronger,
Gunn, as you see, and in a month I hope to be about again."

He averted his face, and for a time gazed sternly and watchfully at the
door.  Then he rose slowly to his feet, and taking the dead man in his
arms, bore him slowly and carefully to his room, and laid him a huddled
heap on the floor.  Swiftly and noiselessly he put the dead man's shoes
on and turned his pockets inside out, kicked a rug out of place, and put
a guinea on the floor.  Then he stole cautiously down stairs and set a
small door at the back open.  A dog barked frantically, and he hurried
back to his room.  The nurse still slumbered by the fire.

She awoke in the morning shivering with the cold, and being jealous of
her reputation, rekindled the fire, and measuring out the dose which the
invalid should have taken, threw it away.  On these unconscious
preparations for an alibi Captain Rogers gazed through half-closed lids,
and then turning his grim face to the wall, waited for the inevitable
alarm.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Captain Rogers, by W.W. Jacobs

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CAPTAIN ROGERS ***

***** This file should be named 12127.txt or 12127.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/2/1/2/12127/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


