The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is Going On
In It, Vol. 1, No. 17, March 4, 1897, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Great Round World and What Is Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 17, March 4, 1897
       A Weekly Magazine for Boys and Girls

Author: Various

Release Date: March 14, 2005 [EBook #15358]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD AND ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team. (www.pgdp.net)








_FIVE CENTS._

THE GREAT ROUND WORLD

AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT

    SUBSCRIPTION PRICE. MARCH 4, 1897  Vol. 1. NO. 17
    $2.50 PER YEAR
    [Entered at Post Office, New York City, as second-class matter]

[Illustration]

    A WEEKLY NEWSPAPER FOR BOYS AND GIRLS

    WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON. PUBLISHER

    NO. 3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST. NEW YORK CITY

       *       *       *       *       *




The Great Round World Prize Competitions

OPEN TO SUBSCRIBERS ONLY.

       *       *       *       *       *

For Commercial Maps of the United States.

THE GREAT ROUND WORLD offers five prizes, each to be a book
costing not over $2.50, and _to be selected by the winners_, for each of
the best five commercial maps of the United States, to be sent in before
February 1st. These maps are to be filled in, without assistance, by the
contestants; Klemm's Relief Map of the United-States to be used for this
purpose; one of these Relief Maps will be sent without charge to any
subscriber who wishes to compete. Directions for the competition will be
found in THE GREAT ROUND WORLD, No. 4, under story of "Pioneer
Settlers of Marietta, Ohio."

       *       *       *       *       *


For the Best Set of Political Maps.

NORTH AMERICA, SOUTH AMERICA, EUROPE, ASIA, AND AFRICA.

    One set will be sent without charge to any yearly subscriber who
    wishes to compete.

A pair of skates will be given to the boy or girl who will fill in and
send the most complete set of political maps of the five continents by
February 1st. These maps are to be the Klemm's Relief Maps, and the
political divisions are to be represented entirely by color, with an index
on the margin of the maps to show which colors represent the different
nations. The skates given as this prize may be selected by the winner.




School and College Text-Books

AT WHOLESALE PRICES

       *       *       *       *       *

    At my New Store (FEBRUARY 1ST)
        3 & 5 West 18th Street
            _The St. Ann Building_

       *       *       *       *       *

With the greatly increased facilities I can now offer to my customers the
convenience of an assortment of text-books and supplies more complete than
any other in any store in this city. Books will be classified according to
subject. Teachers and students are invited to call and refer to the
shelves when in search of information; every convenience and assistance
will be rendered them.

Reading Charts, miscellaneous Reference Charts, Maps, Globes, Blackboards,
and School Supplies at net prices singly or in quantity.

All books removed from old store (more or less damaged by removal) will be
closed out at low prices.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Mail orders promptly attended to All books, etc., subject to approval_

       *       *       *       *       *

=William Beverley Hanson, 3 & 5 West 18th Street=
=FORMERLY 59 FIFTH AVENUE=

Copyrighted 1897, By WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: THE GREAT ROUND WORLD And WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT.]

    VOL. 1   MARCH 4, 1897.   NO. 17

The news from Cuba is not very encouraging.

The reforms promised by Spain are not believed in by the Cubans, and the
fighting is going on as fiercely as ever.

General Gomez, who is the head of the insurgent army, declares that Cuba
will never accept anything from Spain but absolute freedom.

When he took command of the Cuban army, Gomez made this a condition of his
acceptance. He did this because, years ago, when Cuba was fighting Spain,
the Spaniards offered all the reforms the people asked for, and promised
them everything they desired.

The Cubans believed Spain, and laid down their arms, only to find that
they had been deceived and cheated. Spain did not keep her word, and
probably never had any intention of doing so.

General Gomez does not mean to give her the chance of deceiving Cuba
twice.

The Cuban leader has issued orders to the sugar planters, forbidding them
to grind their cane, and threatening to burn their plantations if they
attempt to disobey him. He promises the planters a speedy ending to the
war, and says he is absolutely sure of the final triumph of the Cuban
arms.

In the mean while, he has slipped past General Weyler, who is marching
over the country, declaring it pacified.

The truth of the matter is, that in the so-called pacified country, which
lies between Weyler and Havana, the entire insurgent army is assembled and
at work.

In this very district that General Weyler declares to be so quiet, the
rebels are using dynamite with deadly success. They are placing bombs on
the railroad tracks, and trains are being blown up almost daily, killing
many Spanish soldiers.

News of encounters between the enemies is constantly being brought in.
Every day some small fight occurs that does little for the cause, but
shows that the Cubans are still unconquered.

General Gomez had a long talk with the representative of one of our most
reliable newspapers, and told him that he has over forty thousand soldiers
fighting for freedom, but that unfortunately he has not enough guns or
ammunition for more than half the number. He says that nearly every
soldier carries a machete, which is a weapon in use among Spanish
Americans. It is half knife, half cleaver, and is carried by the peasants
for general use upon the plantations. It makes a formidable weapon, but
is, of course, not so valuable as a rifle would be.

General Gomez said that if his men were only well armed, he would give
battle to Weyler, and would without doubt beat him. He declared that he
could raise seventy-five thousand men in a month, if he only had the
means of arming them.

He spoke in a most determined way about the proposed reforms, and repeated
that he would take nothing from Spain but freedom. He went on to say that
the hatred of Spain was now so strong in Cuban hearts, that were the
revolution to fail, he was sure that a large majority of Cubans would
leave their homes, and go and live in a foreign country, rather than
continue under the hated rule of Spain.

He was asked what he thought about the way the United States was treating
Cuba.

This was rather a difficult question for him to answer, because he was
talking to an American; but General Gomez is a brave man, and a sincere
man, and he was not afraid to give his real opinion.

He said, that while he did not think that the United States was allied
with Spain to bring about the defeat of the Cubans, he thought the refusal
to recognize the Cuban government, and the assistance given to Spain to
stop filibustering, looked very much as if the United States was more
friendly to Spain than to Cuba.

This being the case, he said it was out of the question for the Cuban
government to listen to the advice of the United States about the reforms
that Spain offered. Cuba could not regard the United States as her friend,
and would not therefore take any suggestions from her.

Many people have supposed that even if the Cubans were successful, peace
would not be restored to the island. There are so many negroes and
"half-breed" white people among the Cubans, that the idea has got about
that the white Cubans and colored Cubans would fight each other for the
right to govern.

General Gomez spoke with much feeling on this point.

He said the colored people had borne their share in the revolution bravely
and nobly, and that there never had been, and never would be, any
distinction made between the white man and the man of African origin. All
Cubans had fought shoulder to shoulder, as brother patriots should do, and
brother patriots they would continue, white or colored.

Only once did General Gomez show any excitement, and that was when
Weyler's name was mentioned.

"He is not a soldier, he is not a man, he is not a Christian!" he said.
"If he were a true soldier, I would respect him; if his troops were true
soldiers, I would respect them, even though they had come to hold Cuba in
chains. But he is not a soldier, nor are his men soldiers; they are here
to butcher and destroy. They think to exterminate us; but though Cuba may
weep and bleed and burn, God is with us, and the right will come at last."

He said that he had often thought over Weyler's cruelties, and considered
whether he should not treat the Spanish prisoners in the same way. But he
could not do so. The very thought of the cruelties ordered by Weyler, the
murdering of innocent persons, the attacking of hospitals and killing the
poor invalids, filled him with horror.

He said that he was determined that Cuba should shed no innocent blood in
the name of freedom.

He was finally asked how long the war would continue, and his answer was
very short.

"Until Cuba is free!" he said

       *       *       *       *       *

It is said that General Gomez cannot yet bear to speak about the death of
Maceo, and of his own son, who perished at the same time.

When the news was brought to him, he showed the true nobility of his
character.

Calling his soldiers together, he bade them harbor no thoughts of revenge
for the act of treachery which had cost them so brave a leader, but to
follow the example of those who had died for their country, and fight
until death or success was their portion.

It is said that Gomez, as a token of respect for the dead hero Maceo,
ordered his army to keep "silence" for ten days; which means that nearly
all of the usual noises in camp were suppressed, and stilled in mourning.

While Gomez is showing the true qualities of a soldier, Weyler continues
the atrocious method of warfare that more closely resembles that of the
bloodthirsty red Indian, than of a civilized Christian general.

He is openly in favor of ending the rebellion by killing every man, woman,
and child who is in favor of Cuban liberty. This method is called
"Extermination."

The Marquis de Apezteguia has travelled all the way to Madrid, to tell the
Prime Minister of Spain, Senor Canovas, the truth about Weyler, and to beg
that he be recalled.

He has told the Prime Minister how Weyler has been robbing the people, and
how he has made millions of dollars out of the Cuban war; that he is a
disgrace to Spain, and to the Spanish name, and that there is no chance of
the Cubans accepting terms from Spain while he is in command.

Weyler's treatment of the Cuban women is growing still more cruel.

Several Cuban ladies of rank were seized by his secret police, and without
being told what they were arrested for, were taken to prison, and put in a
cell with the lowest female prisoners.

After being kept in jail for twenty days, they were forced to march, with
all the criminals, through the public streets. They had to pass between
files of soldiers, the mob hooting and howling at them.

They were then put in box-cars, which are cars without seats, like those
we use for baggage. They travelled thus for more than twelve hours, packed
closely together with criminals of every kind, and forced to stand up all
the way.

On arriving at Havana, they were first thrust into jail with the men.

Thinking that this was perhaps a little too severe, they were removed to
the House of Refuge. This proved to be a wretched, unclean place, far
worse than the jail.

The correspondents for the United States papers happened to hear of the
arrival of these unfortunates, and went at once to the House of Refuge to
see them.

Imagine their horror when they found that one of these ladies was a
countrywoman of their own, an American citizen.

Word was sent at once to Consul-General Fitzhugh Lee, and then the
correspondents clubbed together, and bought some beds and small comforts,
and sent them to the ladies.

General Lee at once tried to help the American lady, Mrs. Rodriguez, and
finally got permission for her release.

The other ladies said they wished they were Americans, that they might
also be helped out of their miserable position.

These ladies do not as yet know why they have been arrested. They all have
relatives in the insurgent army, and suppose that is the reason for their
punishment.

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Three Friends_, the filibustering steamer that has been in so much
trouble, will soon know her fate.

She is to be proceeded against for piracy.

The officers, agents, and lawyers are not included in the new case, and so
there is no danger of any of them having to pay the penalty of piracy,
which the law says is hanging.

The vessel alone is the guilty party, and if her guilt is proved, she will
be confiscated, which means, taken away from her owners.

We spoke about the trial of the tug _Dauntless_ and the _Three Friends_ in
No. 14 of THE GREAT ROUND WORLD, and told how Judge Locke had set
them at liberty, because he said that if no state of war existed in Cuba,
the tugs could not be guilty of breaking any of the laws between nations.

Attorney-General Harmon says that this decision of Judge Locke's makes the
_Three Friends_ guilty of piracy, for in time of peace she fired a gun on
the subjects of a friendly nation.

It seems that whichever way they fix it, the _Three Friends_ is in
trouble.

The whole case rests upon the statement, made in certain New York
newspapers, that the _Three Friends_ had a Hotchkiss gun in her bows, with
which she fired on the Spanish gunboat that tried to prevent her landing
her party.

If this statement is true, the _Three Friends_ is guilty, and will have
some difficulty in escaping from justice. But it is evident that her
owners are going to deny the whole thing, and say that she had no gun on
board.

In Jacksonville, where she will be tried, the people are already saying
that it is foolish to suppose that there was a gun on so small a tug as
the _Three Friends_, and in Washington it is thought unlikely that it can
be proved that a gun was on the boat.

This makes the matter very interesting, because the New York newspapers
which published the story will not like to have it proved that they print
anything which is not true.

They must do everything in their power to prove that the report _was_
true, while the owners of the tug will make every effort to prove that it
was false, and only a made-up story sent by the newspaper correspondent to
give his paper an interesting item.

These "interesting" items are so frequent that people are afraid to
believe all they read in the papers.

It is for this very reason that we have warned our readers that it is not
safe to say "such and such a thing has happened" until time enough has
passed to prove or contradict a statement; and this is the reason why we
so often say, "it is said that this or that has happened." We want to be
quite sure that a thing is true before we assert it as a fact.

       *       *       *       *       *

There may be some false report of this character at the bottom of the
trouble in Siam, which we were speaking about last week.

The State Department has merely filed all the papers in relation to the
outrage on Vice-Consul Kellet, and has decided to let the matter drop.

Consul-General Barrett sent word that the King of Siam had not taken any
notice of his demand for an inquiry into the matter; and the only reply
given him was a polite note saying that his letter had been received.

People who know, say that this means that the Government wishes to have
the matter dropped. Otherwise word would have been sent to Bangkok that
the Consul-General was to insist upon a proper explanation from the
Siamese government.

Meanwhile, the commander of the gunboat which was sent to Siam, has
received orders to make inquiries. He is not to do this as an official, or
on the part of the Government, but merely to find out the facts, and let
the Government know if it is necessary to take any further notice of the
affair.

It seems that Mr. Olney thinks that Mr. Kellet may have been to blame, and
that Mr. Barrett got excited, and made demands from the Siamese government
without first stopping to find out the truth.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is more trouble in Turkey, between the Turks and the Christians.

This time the trouble is in Crete.

Crete is a large island in the Grecian Archipelago, and lies just at the
foot of Greece.

It is a very celebrated island, and played a most important part in the
affairs of Europe when Greece was the famous empire of the world.

It has another claim for celebrity. It was the supposed birthplace of the
heathen god Jupiter. Jupiter was a fabulous person, of course, but the
Greeks believed in him, and declared that he was born on Mount Ida in the
island of Crete. When you grow older and read your classics, you will
learn a great deal about the heathen gods and goddesses whom the Greeks
worshipped in the days before Christianity had come to enlighten the
world.

Crete, in the days of Grecian glory, was one of the most famous parts of
that wonderful empire. From its favorable geographical position, it was at
one time the place through which all the arts and wonders of Asia and the
East were made known to the then rough and uncultivated Europeans.

People from the East, and from the West, would meet on the island of
Crete, and it became one of the most important points in Europe.

After many ups and downs--you should read all about them in your Grecian
history--Crete fell, with the rest of Greece, into the hands of the Turks.

When the Greeks fought for and gained their freedom from the Turks in
1827, Crete struggled bravely for liberty too, but she was not as
fortunate as her sister land, and had to submit to the hated rule of the
Turk.

The Cretans are Greeks and Christians, and long to be under the rule of a
Christian monarch.

In 1869 they made another struggle for freedom, and appealed to the powers
of Europe to free them.

They asked to be allowed to join themselves to Greece, or else to be given
liberty, under the protection of some Christian country.

But they got no help, and the Turks still ruled in Crete.

The present outbreak is but a renewal of the old feud. The recent murders
of Christians in Armenia have made the Christians in Crete restless, and
they are determined to make one more effort for freedom.

The Greeks are anxious to aid the Cretans, and at the first word of the
revolt in Crete sent war-ships to Canea, the port at which the fighting
has taken place.

The revolt appears to have been well planned, for the main cities of the
island were soon in the possession of the Cretans, who only waited a
signal from Greece to declare a union with that country, and to overthrow
the rule of Turkey.

The signal seems not to have been long in coming, for, if the news can be
believed, the union of Crete and Greece has already been proclaimed.

This will probably mean a war between Greece and Turkey; indeed, it seems
impossible that war can be prevented, for Turkey is not going to sit
quietly down and allow her possessions to be taken from her.

There is a report that a Greek ship entered Canea, the port of Crete, and
did not salute the Turkish flag. This looks very like war.

It is the custom for every vessel on entering a foreign port to salute the
flag of that port, and a failure to do so is considered a very grave
insult.

The latest news seems very serious indeed, almost as if this Cretan matter
were going to bring about the European war that has been so long feared.

Russia has suddenly become very indignant with England, declaring that she
has stirred up this Cretan trouble, so that, in the confusion that will
follow, she may be able to secure some important ports in the
Mediterranean Sea.

The Russians have ranged themselves on the side of Turkey, and insist that
the only way for peace to be restored in Crete is for Russian and French
war-ships to occupy the ports, and force the people back into quiet.

England will not submit to anything of this sort, and if Russia and France
take such action, war is bound to follow.

It must not be supposed that a war with Turkey is going to be an easy
thing.

The Turkish soldiers are a fine, well-drilled body of men; indeed, the
English Minister to Greece stated that the Turkish soldiers were the
finest he had ever seen.

The Janizaries, the most famous regiment of soldiers in the world, are the
body-guard of the Sultan of Turkey.

Not only are they well-drilled and powerful men, but they fight absolutely
without fear. A Turkish soldier will never run away--he fights till he
conquers or dies. This is due to his religion, which teaches him that what
is to be will be, and that if it is his fate to be killed he will be
killed, whether he runs away or stays in the battle.

So he stays--and does all the harm he can before his fate, whatever it may
be, overtakes him.

It is also his belief that if he is killed in battle his sins are forgiven
him, and he will go straight to Paradise; so he has no fear of the fight,
and makes a very stubborn and dangerous foe.

In the mean while, the Sultan of Turkey has a little business of his own
on hand.

He is very much annoyed at the length of the conference of the Powers
about the reforms he is to be asked to make.

All the dead walls of Constantinople, where the Ambassadors are meeting,
have been covered with placards and posters of a character to enrage the
common people, and make them turn their thoughts to fresh massacres.

It is said on good authority, that the placards come from the Sultan, and
have been posted by his orders.

It is also said that he hopes to provoke the people and cause fresh
rioting, and so break up the conference which so much annoys him.

Another massacre may be expected any moment.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is a movement on foot in New York, to prevent any more of the very
high buildings being put up.

It seems that no one has any idea of the danger from high buildings.

The Board of Trade and Transportation, which is trying to get a bill
passed in Albany, preventing any further work of this sort being done,
asked the Chief of the Fire Department to come before it and give his
opinion of these high structures.

He told the committee, that at the present time the Fire Department could
not fight a fire in any of these tall buildings. He said that none of the
engines owned by the department could throw a stream of water higher than
125 feet from the ground, and that all floors over that height would have
to be left to burn.

All the very high buildings are supposed to be fire proof, and Chief
Bonner was asked what he thought about them. He laughed, and said there
was no such thing as a fire-proof building, and that in fact the
iron-framed structures, supposed to be fire-proof, were perhaps a little
more dangerous than the old style of brick building. He said that these
frames become heated and bend, pulling the walls down, so that they fall
much more quickly than they used to, and make the firemen's work more
difficult.

The only absolutely fire-proof building that he knew of was the Public
Library in Boston, where there was no wood at all used in the
building--the doors and window frames even being of iron. He was sure that
so long as wood was used in the construction of any part of a building, it
was quite impossible to call it fire-proof.

Several architects were asked to give their opinions, and also some
engineers who had made a study of the laws of health.

These men were all agreed that high buildings were unsanitary--which means
bad for the health--and that they made all the lower buildings around them
unsanitary too, by shutting off the light and air, and making them dark,
and inclined to be damp.

The general opinion was so much against these "sky-scrapers" that the
Board of Trade and Transportation decided to send a bill to the
Legislature in Albany, praying that the erection of such dangerous
buildings might be stopped.

They ask that no structure may be higher than 165 feet. This will allow
for twelve and thirteen stories. It was proposed to run up some offices
that would be twenty-two stories high, and it was this that frightened
people into action on the subject.

The Board of Trade and Transportation does some very good work for the
citizens of New York.

It is made up of men who have large business interests in the city, and
they watch all the bills that are sent up to Albany, and all the work done
by the Mayor and Aldermen, and take notice of every part of the city's
government, to make sure that the best interests of the citizens are being
cared for.

This Board is of the greatest service to all New Yorkers. The business
interests of a city demand that all the roads shall be kept in good
repair, that the ways of reaching the city shall be many and easy, and
that the fares shall not be too high.

Over all these matters, and a great many more which we have not space to
write about, the Board of Trade and Transportation watches faithfully and
untiringly.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a meeting of the George Junior Republic Association the other
day. Many interesting things were spoken of in regard to the settlement at
Freeville.

You may not perhaps know what a wonderful association this Republic is.

The Junior Republic was started in 1890 by Mr. William R. George.

This kind-hearted man read a story in a newspaper, about a ragged boy in
City Hall Park, eagerly watching a little yellow spot on the grass which
he hoped was a dandelion. It told how, after a weary waiting until the
policeman's back was turned, the boy dashed under the forbidden rail,
stooped for the prize, only to find that it was a bit of orange peel.

Mr. George was touched by the story of the boy's disappointment; the more
he thought of it, and of the longing of a city child for the trees and
flowers of the country, the more he grieved that so many little ones never
had a chance of seeing the green fields, and enjoying the wonders of
Nature.

The result of it all was, that Mr. George collected twenty-two poor little
ragged lads, and gave them a two weeks' outing at Freeville that summer.

From this beginning, the whole wonderful plan of the Republic shaped
itself in his mind.

He thought that if he could get hold of the rough children of the streets,
who have no kind parents to care for them, and use the summer holiday to
influence them to good actions, he would be doing a great work for them.

He felt that the best way to bring this about was to put them in a
miniature world of their own, where they would have the same trials and
temptations as in their city homes, but with the advantage of having some
one at hand to show them the right way.

His plan was to form a genuine republic, to which boys and girls would
be equally welcome as citizens. The plan has been carried out, and the
Junior Republic is a great success.

It is an absolute republic, with a government like our own. It has its
President, its Senators and Congressmen, and so forth.

Mr. George is the President; the boy and girl citizens form the Congress,
the Cabinet officers, the Judge, and the police.

The Constitution of the United States, and the laws of New York State, are
followed as closely as possible, and other laws are made to regulate the
particular needs of the Republic.

All citizens, boys and girls, are required to work. Nothing is given away
in Freeville. The young citizens are paid for their work, and have to
support themselves on their earnings.

The boys and girls who will not work get no food.

In all large cities and communities, the people who have money are obliged
to pay a certain sum to help others who have none. Therefore men and women
who do not work because they are old or ill, are provided with food and
shelter from the money, or taxes, that the well-to-do have to pay.

[Illustration]

In Freeville it is different. All the citizens are young and healthy, and
able to work, so a law has been passed that no laws shall be made to raise
money to keep the idle. No money is set aside to keep paupers, and those
who do not work cannot eat. The result is, that there are no paupers or
tramps in Freeville.

The way the children earn their money, is by working from eight-thirty
till noon every day at farming, landscape gardening, carpentry, cooking,
millinery, and sewing.

They are paid according to their skill, and are divided into three grades;
unskilled, medium, and skilled labor.

The children naturally try their best to improve, so that they may get
higher wages, and thus they gradually progress, and learn their trades.

They are paid every Saturday, like regular laborers, and out of the money
they earn, they pay for their board and lodging through the week.

There is a bank in which the thrifty can put their savings, and when they
go back to the city they draw these savings out.

The money used is not regular money, but Freeville money, made of
cardboard, and at the end of the holiday the children are not given United
States money for their savings, but the value of their little hoard in
vegetables, fruit, and clothing.

This summer outing teaches the rough boys of the city what their duties in
life are, and shows them, better than words could do, that the boy or man
who wants to be happy must work honestly and obey the law.

Freeville has its boy policemen, who arrest all evildoers; its jail, where
the offenders are locked up; and its gang of convicts, who are only given
bread and water, and prison fare, and are kept at work the whole day,
instead of from eight-thirty till noon.

The records of the Republic show that boys who have gone into Freeville
rough and bad, and have commenced their citizenship with idling and
thieving, have in a few weeks become law-abiding citizens.

So successful has this summer Republic been, that Mr. George has made up
his mind to keep it going the whole year round.

Over two hundred children were housed there last summer, and thirty-four
boys are passing the winter there.

Through the generosity of some wealthy people, a farm of forty-eight acres
has been bought for the Republic, and this spring and summer it is
intended to make room for a much greater number of "citizens."

The Republic is supported by subscriptions, and the treasurer wants to
raise ten thousand dollars, to carry out the many fine ideas Mr. George
has in mind for this summer.

England, Germany, and Japan have made inquiries into the work at
Freeville, and Mr. George hopes that republics may be started in other
countries.

Pennsylvania, Massachusetts, and Illinois are starting republics of their
own, and Mr. George has had word from the Junior Republic of California,
that the plan is in working order there, and doing exceedingly well.

                                              GENIE H. ROSENFELD.




THE SCHUBERT CENTENNIAL.


A Schubert celebration was held in Vienna on the hundredth anniversary of
the great composer's birth, which occurred on January 31st.

Concerts of Schubert music were given, and an exhibition of his
manuscripts and letters.

An old battered piano which he had used was also shown. This is the only
article which belonged to him that is known to exist, as he died in
extreme poverty. It seems sad that his genius was not properly appreciated
until after his death, and that he who was to give so much to the world of
music should have been denied all but the barest necessities.

We publish an account of his life, written especially for THE GREAT
ROUND WORLD.


FRANZ SCHUBERT.

Eighteen hundred and ninety-seven is the centennial year of Franz
Schubert, the great composer, who was born in Vienna on the 31st of
January, 1797. He was of humble lineage. His father, who also bore the
name of Franz, was the son of a peasant, who studied in Vienna, and became
assistant to his brother, a schoolmaster. He married Elizabeth Vitz, who
had been in service as a cook in Vienna. Franz Peter Schubert was the
thirteenth of a family of fourteen children, nine of whom died in infancy.
His love of music was apparent when he was very young. A relative often
took him to visit a pianoforte warehouse, and there, and on an old
worn-out piano at home, the child studied his first exercises without a
master. At the age of seven he had a teacher, Michael Holzer, who used to
cry out, "When I wish to teach him anything, he always knows it already."
When he was eleven years old he was employed as a solo singer and violin
player in a church. A little later his father succeeded in getting him a
position in the Emperor's Chapel, and he thus became a pupil in a music
school, which was called the "Convict."

It seems that the boys at the Convict endured many privations. The
practice-room was unbearably cold in winter, and the young students were
allowed to go without food for eight hours and a half, between a "poor
dinner and a wretched supper." When he was about fifteen, Franz wrote to
his brother, explaining his position, his hungry longing for a roll or an
apple, and concluded in these words: "I rely on the teaching of the
Apostle Matthew, who says, 'Let him that hath two coats give one to the
poor.' Meanwhile I trust you will listen to the voice which unceasingly
appeals to you to remember your loving, hoping, poverty-stricken--and once
again I repeat poverty-stricken--brother Franz."

His earliest composition for the piano is dated April, 1810. It was his
habit to date all his pieces. In March, 1811, he composed a long vocal
piece, "Hagar's Lament over Her Dying Son." His boy friends at the Convict
were devoted to him, and were eager to play, sing, or copy any of his
compositions. One of them, Josef Spaun, who was several years older than
Schubert, and better off, helped him to procure all the music paper he
needed.

His first mass, in F, was composed and performed in 1814. It is said to be
the most remarkable first mass ever produced, excepting Beethoven's in C.
In 1815, when he was only eighteen years old, he composed the music for
more than a hundred songs. The fine song, the "Erl King," was written in
this year, and many of his boyish songs are among his finest productions.
When he died in 1828, he left more than 1,100 compositions, the greater
number of which had not then been published.

In his lifetime, some of his songs were sold for a few pence, and he lived
in poverty nearly all his days. Yet publishers have grown rich by the sale
of his compositions, and his work is a delight to the world. The house in
which he was born is marked by a marble tablet, and costly memorials have
been raised in his honor. Some words that he spoke in the delirium of his
last illness made his brother Ferdinand believe that he wished to be
buried near Beethoven. This wish was fulfilled, and his grave lies near
that of the great musician, for whom from his early boyhood he always had
a profound reverence and admiration.

                                            M. BOURCHIER SANFORD.




INVENTION AND DISCOVERY.


There has lately been patented in England a system for making buttons,
combs, brush-handles, billiard balls, and such like articles out of milk.

The bone buttons and articles of that kind, which we have been using up to
the present time, have been made of refuse from the slaughter-houses. This
new process will only require milk.

Any one who knows anything about dairy work knows what loppered milk is.
It is the thick soured milk that one finds under the butter cream.

This loppered milk is made into cottage cheese, and many people, in making
their cottage cheese, stand it for a moment on the fire to thicken.

Woe to the dairy wife who lets it stay too long!

It becomes like little knobs of rubber, that nothing will soften. When one
tries to bite it one's teeth rebound. It is the toughest kind of material.

Mr. Callander, the Englishman who invented the milk buttons, must have had
an encounter with some of this cottage cheese, and his trouble in chewing
it must have made him wonder whether it wasn't intended for something else
instead of food.

He has found a means of making the loppered milk so solid, that three days
after he has mixed it with some ingredients, the secret of which he will
not tell, it is like celluloid, and is ready to be cut.

It has a glossy surface, and is of a creamy color.

It is said to be less brittle than bone or celluloid, and not likely to
chip. Any one who has eaten cottage cheese that has been too long on the
stove will believe that the new substance has powers of resistance that
are quite unequalled.

                                                        G.H.R.




LETTERS TO THE EDITOR.


The Editor is pleased to acknowledge the letters from John Russell and
Fred S. Hall, and to know that THE GREAT ROUND WORLD is enjoyed
by them.

It is difficult to answer Fred's inquiry, as to where we get our news. The
only true answer is, from all over and everywhere. The Editor has eyes and
ears open all the while to gather interesting facts for the paper's young
readers.

The Editor was pleased to receive the pleasant letter from I.L.G. Rice.
The suggestion of an article on "Casting and Founding" is good, and will
be adopted at the earliest possible moment.

I.L.G. Rice must, however, bear in mind that expansion is thoroughly
understood by scientists, and that Dr. Moissan was not doing the rough
work of a foundry, but conducting a most delicate experiment, in which he
brought into play all the scientific knowledge available.

    DEAR EDITOR:--I have been thinking that I would write
    you and tell you how much I like THE GREAT ROUND WORLD.
    It interests me very much. I have looked for salt in the
    streets, but have not seen any.

    It was funny that the bottle that Mr. McCoy threw into the water
    made such a journey.

    I must stop now, but I still remain,

                                            Your affectionate reader,
    NEW YORK CITY.                               JOHN F. RUSSELL, JR.


    DEAR EDITOR:--I am very much pleased with your book,
    THE GREAT ROUND WORLD. My father wrote you to-day. I am
    very much interested in it.

    I want to ask you a few questions.

    Can you tell me where you get your news? I see you say that
    Maceo was shot, after all. Do you think United States will
    declare war with Spain? Could you send me a copy of THE
    GREAT ROUND WORLD about the time the news of Maceo's death
    was first heard of, if you have a spare one?

    I must close now. Please direct the letter to

    NORTH ADAMS, MASS.                          FRED S. HALL.

    DEAR EDITOR:--Our teacher has been receiving all of
    THE GREAT ROUND WORLD papers, and she reads to us every
    morning.

    We like the paper ever so much, and have learned a great deal
    about both the Cuban war and our government. She also read us
    the little note you had printed in the back, saying you would
    answer (and be glad to) any question we might ask.

    We pupils do not understand about the new platform at the end of
    Brooklyn Bridge, and I am going to ask a few questions. Will the
    platform carry you down as well as up? How many will it carry?
    About how large is it? Is there more than one? If so, please
    tell me how many.

                                      From your friend,
    CHEYENNE, WYO.                              ELSIE K. (age 11).



DEAR ELSIE:

In reply to your letter about the Brooklyn Bridge.

It is only arranged to save people climbing up-stairs. It is easy enough
to go down-stairs, but it is the climbing up that people dislike, and the
new elevator is to save this trouble.

It will take up three thousand passengers an hour, and if it is the
success it promises to be, six of these lazy-man's staircases will be put
into use.

It is the same size as the staircase of which it is to take the place.





=School Books Wanted=


The following school books will be taken in exchange for subscriptions for
"Great Round World" at prices named.

Send books by express prepaid. Send none which are much soiled or worn;
pages must not be torn nor missing. Mark package--"GREAT ROUND
WORLD, 3 and 5 West 18th Street, New York City, care William Beverley
Harison."

Put your name on package and send a list by mail with your subscription
order.

=We can use Standard School Books of all kinds, send List of any you may
wish to dispose of.=

=READERS=

    Barnes'          First, 20c.   Second, 30c.   Third, 40c.
    Appleton's           "  15c.       "   25c.      "   30c.
    Cyr's                "  20c.       "   25c.      "   30c.
    New Franklin         "  20c.       "   30c.      "   35c.
    McGuffey's Revised   "  15c.       "   25c.      "   30c.
    Stickney's           "  10c.       "   15c.      "   20c.
    Swinton's            "  20c.       "   30c.      "   40c.
    Information          "  30c.       "   30c.      "   30c.

=HISTORIES. UNITED STATES=

    Barnes'          Primary, 40c.   Large 1890 or later, 75c.
    Eggleston's   First Book, 40c.     "                  75c.
    Fiske's                            "                  75c.
    Johnston's       Shorter, 40c.     "                  75c.
    Montgomery's  Beginner's, 30c.     "                  75c.
    Sheldon's                          "                  50c.
    Thomas'                            "                  50c.


=ARITHMETICS=

    Bailey's       Mental, 15c.
    Brooks'     New  "     15c.                New Written, 30c.
    Atwood's       Part 1, 20c.                     Part 2, 35c.
    Milne's      Elements, 25c.                   Standard, 40c.
    Prince's   No. 1 to 7, 15c. each
    Sanford's     Primary, 20c.              Common School, 35c.
    Robinson's     New  "  10c.                  Rudiments, 25c.


=GEOGRAPHIES--(These must have North and South Dakota)=

    Appleton's, Barnes', Maury's, or Eclectic Elementary, 35c.
    Monteith's First, 20c. Introduction 30c. Manual, 50c.


=GRAMMARS=

    Reed & Kellogg's Elementary, 20c.         Higher, 40c.
    Whitney & Lockwood's,        35c.
    Hyde's        First Lessons, 20c.    Second Book, 40c.
    Tarbell's        First Book, 25c.       "      "  40c.


=PRIMERS--10 Cents Each=

Appleton's, Cyr's, Interstate, McGuffey's Revised, Riverside, Swinton's,
Monroe's.


=SPELLERS--10 Cents Each=

McGuffey's Revised, Gilbert's School Studies, Modern, Harrington's (2
parts in one), Babcock's, Patterson's Common School, Reed's, Sheldon's
Word Studies, Swinton's.


We can use, in addition to the ones named in this list, all kinds of
dictionaries, late editions of French and German books, Algebras, Latin
and Greek books, and in fact all kinds of late text-books. If you send a
list, prices will be given.




=History and Manuals of Vertical Writing=

    By JOHN JACKSON

       *       *       *       *       *

    Theory and Practice of Vertical Writing,   $1.25
    Teaching of Vertical Writing,                .50

       *       *       *       *       *


John Jackson, the originator of this system of vertical writing, is the
only teacher who has had the years of practice in teaching it that make
these the standard manuals for teachers and students. The adoption of
vertical writing abroad and in this country is largely due to his
persistent work and the marvellous results of his teaching. His series of
copy-books were the first to be used in this country, and are considered
by experienced teachers, who are not to be misled by mere beauty of
engravers work, to contain the only practical well-graded course of
instruction leading from primary work to the rapid and now justly
celebrated =telegraph hand=--for these books are the only ones containing
copies in this rapid writing. The telegraph hand is the style used by the
best telegraph operators in the country--and these writers are universally
acknowledged to be the most rapid writers, and writers of a hand which of
necessity must be most legible.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Copy-Books (10 numbers),     96 cents per dozen
    Copy-Pads (8 numbers),       96 cents per dozen

BOTH SERIES CONTAIN SIMILAR COPIES.

Sample sets to teachers (post-paid), 75 cents


       *       *       *       *       *

    =WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON
    3 and 5 West 18th Street, New York City=





SIMPLE LESSONS IN THE

STUDY OF NATURE

By I.G. OAKLEY


This is a handy little book, which many a teacher who is looking for means
to offer children genuine nature study may be thankful to get hold of.

Nature lessons, to be entitled to that name, must deal with what can be
handled and scrutinized at leisure by the child, pulled apart, and even
wasted. This can be done with the objects discussed in this book; they are
under the feet of childhood--grass, feathers, a fallen leaf, a budding
twig, or twisted shell; these things cannot be far out of the way, even
within the stony limits of a city.

Nor are the lessons haphazard dashes at the nearest living thing; on the
contrary, they are virtually fundamental, whether with respect to their
relation to some of the classified sciences, or with reference to the
development of thought and power of expression in the child himself.

The illustrations are few, and scarcely more than figures; it is not meant
to be a pretty picture-book, yet is most clearly and beautifully printed
and arranged, for its material is to be that out of which pictures are
made. It will be found full of suggestions of practical value to teachers
who are carrying the miscellaneous work of ungraded schools, and who have
the unspeakable privilege of dealing with their pupils untrammelled by
cast-iron methods and account-keeping examination records.

    =_Sample copy, 50 Cents, post-paid_=

       *       *       *       *       *

    =WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON
    3 & 5 W. 18th St. . . . New York City=





=KLEMMS'=

=RELIEF PRACTICE MAPS.=

       *       *       *       *       *

=LIST OF MAPS.=

    Small size, 9-1/2 x 11 { Plain,                       5 cents each.
                           { With Waterproofed surface   10   "    "

    Europe, Asia, Africa; North America, South America, East Central
    States, New England, Middle Atlantic States, South Atlantic
    States, Palestine, Australia.


    Large size, 10 x 15 { Plain,                     10 cents each.
                        { With Waterproofed Surface, 15   "     "

    United States, British Isles, Roman Empire, Western Europe,
    North America, South America, Asia.

    (POSTAGE ON SINGLE MAPS, 5 CENTS.)

       *       *       *       *       *

"I would advise =Sunday-school teachers= to use, in connection with the
lessons of 1897, =Klemm's Relief Map of the Roman Empire=. Every scholar
who can draw should have a copy of it. Being blank, it can be beautifully
colored: waters, blue; mountains, brown; valleys, green; deserts, yellow;
cities marked with pin-holes; and the journeys of Paul can be traced upon
it."--MRS. WILBUR F. CRAFTS, _President International Union of
Primary Sabbath-School Teachers of the United States_.

       *       *       *       *       *

=DESCRIPTION OF THE MAPS.=

These maps are made in two forms, both with beautifully executed relief
(embossed)--the cheaper ones of plain stiff paper similar to drawing paper
(these are to be substituted for and used as outline map blanks), the
others covered with a durable waterproof surface, that can be quickly
cleaned with a damp sponge, adapted to receive a succession of markings
and cleansings. Oceans, lakes, and rivers, as well as land, appear in the
same color, white, so as to facilitate the use of the map as a
=_geographical slate_=.

       *       *       *       *       *

    =WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON
    _3 & 5 W. 18th St. ... New York City_=



EXTRA EYES

       *       *       *       *       *

Have you ever seen the beautiful colors in a fly's wing? or the hole
through a hair, or the little seed babies in the different seeds? Probably
not unless you have some extra eyes to see them with. We call these EXTRA
EYES, MICROSCOPES, Microscope is a name made from two Greek words, MICROS,
"small," and SKOPEIN, "to view," and is an instrument to look at small
things.

A very nice one is shown in the following picture; it has glass plates to
put these small things on, a mirror to reflect the light under them, and
all of the little instruments necessary. The price is $2.00, and this
covers the entire cost of a nice strong box with a place for each part,
which will be sent to any address for this price.

[Illustration]

=William Beverley Harison, 3 and 5 West 18th St., N.Y. City.=





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is
Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 17, March 4, 1897, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD AND ***

***** This file should be named 15358.txt or 15358.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/5/3/5/15358/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team. (www.pgdp.net)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
