The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Angel Over the Right Shoulder
by Elizabeth Wooster Stuart Phelps

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Angel Over the Right Shoulder
       The Beginning of a New Year

Author: Elizabeth Wooster Stuart Phelps

Release Date: February 11, 2004 [EBook #11033]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ANGEL OVER THE RIGHT SHOULDER ***




Produced by Internet Archive; University of Florida, Children, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team.





[Illustration:]

The Angel over the Right Shoulder

[Illustration:]




The Angel over the Right Shoulder

or the

BEGINNING OF A NEW YEAR.

BY

THE AUTHOR OF "SUNNY SIDE."



1852.




The Angel over the Right Shoulder

       *       *       *       *       *

"There! a woman's work is never done," said Mrs. James; "I thought, for
once, I was through; but just look at that lamp, now! it will not burn,
and I must go and spend half an hour over it."

"Don't you wish you had never been married?" said Mr. James, with a
good-natured laugh.

"Yes"--rose to her lips, but was checked by a glance at the group upon
the floor, where her husband was stretched out, and two little urchins
with sparkling eyes and glowing cheeks, were climbing and tumbling over
him, as if they found in this play the very essence of fun.

She did say, "I should like the good, without the evil, if I could have
it."

"You have no evils to endure," replied her husband.

"That is just all you gentlemen know about it. What would you think, if
you could not get an uninterrupted half hour to yourself, from morning
till night? I believe you would give up trying to do anything."

"There is no need of that; all you want, is _system_. If you arranged
your work systematically, you would find that you could command your
time."

"Well," was the reply, "all I wish is, that you could just follow me
around for one day, and see what I have to do. If you could reduce it
all to system, I think you would show yourself a genius."

When the lamp was trimmed, the conversation was resumed. Mr. James had
employed the "half hour," in meditating on this subject.

"Wife," said he, as she came in, "I have a plan to propose to you, and I
wish you to promise me beforehand, that you will accede to it. It is to
be an experiment, I acknowledge, but I wish it to have a fair trial. Now
to please me, will you promise?"

Mrs. James hesitated. She felt almost sure that his plan would be quite
impracticable, for what does a man know of a woman's work? yet she
promised.

"Now I wish you," said he, "to set apart two hours of every day for your
own private use. Make a point of going to your room and locking yourself
in; and also make up your mind to let the work which is not done, go
undone, if it must. Spend this time on just those things which will be
most profitable to yourself. I shall bind you to your promise for one
month--then, if it has proved a total failure, we will devise something
else."

"When shall I begin?"

"To-morrow."

The morrow came. Mrs. James had chosen the two hours before dinner as
being, on the whole, the most convenient and the least liable to
interruption. They dined at one o'clock. She wished to finish her
morning work, get dressed for the day, and enter her room at eleven.

Hearty as were her efforts to accomplish this, the hour of eleven found
her with her work but half done; yet, true to her promise, she left all,
retired to her room and locked the door.

With some interest and hope, she immediately marked out a course of
reading and study, for these two precious hours; then, arranging her
table, her books, pen and paper, she commenced a schedule of her work
with much enthusiasm. Scarcely had she dipped her pen in ink, when she
heard the tramping of little feet along the hall, and then a pounding at
her door.

"Mamma! mamma! I cannot find my mittens, and Hannah is going to slide
without me."

"Go to Amy, my dear; mamma is busy."

"So Amy busy too; she say she can't leave baby."

The child began to cry, still standing close to the fastened door. Mrs.
James knew the easiest, and indeed the only way of settling the trouble,
was to go herself and hunt up the missing mittens. Then a parley must
be held with Frank, to induce him to wait for his sister, and the
child's tears must be dried, and little hearts must be all set right
before the children went out to play; and so favorable an opportunity
must not be suffered to slip, without impressing on young minds the
importance of having a "place for everything and everything in its
place;" this took time; and when Mrs. James returned to her study, her
watch told her that _half_ her portion had gone. Quietly resuming her
work, she was endeavoring to mend her broken train of thought, when
heavier steps were heard in the hall, and the fastened door was once
more besieged. Now, Mr. James must be admitted.

"Mary," said he, "cannot you come and sew a string on for me? I do
believe there is not a bosom in my drawer in order, and I am in a great
hurry. I ought to have been down town an hour ago."

The schedule was thrown aside, the workbasket taken, and Mrs. James
followed him. She soon sewed on the tape, but then a button needed
fastening--and at last a rip in his glove, was to be mended. As Mrs.
James stitched away on the glove, a smile lurked in the corners of her
mouth, which her husband observed.

"What are you laughing at?" asked he.

"To think how famously your plan works."

"I declare!" said he, "is this your study hour? I am sorry, but what can
a man do? He cannot go down town without a shirt bosom!"

"Certainly not," said his wife, quietly.

When her liege lord was fairly equipped and off, Mrs. James returned to
her room. A half an hour yet remained to her, and of this she
determined to make the most. But scarcely had she resumed her pen, when
there was another disturbance in the entry. Amy had returned from
walking out with the baby, and she entered the nursery with him, that
she might get him to sleep. Now it happened that the only room in the
house which Mrs. James could have to herself with a fire, was the one
adjoining the nursery. She had become so accustomed to the ordinary
noise of the children, that it did not disturb her; but the very
extraordinary noise which master Charley sometimes felt called upon to
make, when he was fairly on his back in the cradle, did disturb the
unity of her thoughts. The words which she was reading rose and fell
with the screams and lulls of the child, and she felt obliged to close
her book, until the storm was over. When quiet was restored in the
cradle, the children came in from sliding, crying with cold fingers--and
just as she was going to them, the dinner-bell rang.

"How did your new plan work this morning?" inquired Mr. James.

"Famously," was the reply, "I read about seventy pages of German, and as
many more in French."

"I am sure _I_ did not hinder you long."

"No--yours was only one of a dozen interruptions."

"O, well! you must not get discouraged. Nothing succeeds well the first
time. Persist in your arrangement, and by and by the family will learn
that if they want anything of you, they must wait until after dinner."

"But what can a man do?" replied his wife; "he cannot go down town
without a shirt-bosom."

"I was in a bad case," replied Mr. James, "it may not happen again. I am
anxious to have you try the month out faithfully, and then we will see
what has come of it."

The second day of trial was a stormy one. As the morning was dark,
Bridget over-slept, and consequently breakfast was too late by an hour.
This lost hour Mrs. James could not recover. When the clock struck
eleven, she seemed but to have commenced her morning's work, so much
remained to be done. With mind disturbed and spirits depressed, she left
her household matters "in the suds," as they were, and punctually
retired to her study. She soon found, however, that she could not fix
her attention upon any intellectual pursuit. Neglected duties haunted
her, like ghosts around the guilty conscience. Perceiving that she was
doing nothing with her books, and not wishing to lose the morning
wholly, she commenced writing a letter. Bridget interrupted her before
she had proceeded far on the first page.

"What, ma'am, shall we have for dinner? No marketing ha'n't come."

"Have some steaks, then."

"We ha'n't got none, ma'am."

"I will send out for some, directly."

Now there was no one to send but Amy, and Mrs. James knew it. With a
sigh, she put down her letter and went into the nursery.

"Amy, Mr. James has forgotten our marketing. I should like to have you
run over to the provision store, and order some beef-steaks. I will stay
with the baby."

Amy was not much pleased to be sent out on this errand. She remarked,
that "she must change her dress first."

"Be as quick as possible," said Mrs. James, "for I am particularly
engaged at this hour."

Amy neither obeyed, nor disobeyed, but managed to take her own time,
without any very deliberate intention to do so. Mrs. James, hoping to
get along with a sentence or two, took her German book into the nursery.
But this arrangement was not to master Charley's mind. A fig did he care
for German, but "the kitties," he must have, whether or no--and kitties
he would find in that particular book--so he turned its leaves over in
great haste. Half of the time on the second day of trial had gone, when
Amy returned and Mrs. James with a sigh, left her nursery. Before one
o'clock, she was twice called into the kitchen to superintend some
important dinner arrangement, and thus it turned out that she did not
finish one page of her letter.

On the third morning the sun shone, and Mrs. James rose early, made
every provision which she deemed necessary for dinner, and for the
comfort of her family; and then, elated by her success, in good spirits,
and with good courage, she entered her study precisely at eleven
o'clock, and locked her door. Her books were opened, and the challenge
given to a hard German lesson. Scarcely had she made the first onset,
when the door-bell was heard to ring, and soon Bridget coming nearer and
nearer--then tapping at the door.

"Somebodies wants to see you in the parlor, ma'am."

"Tell them I am engaged, Bridget."

"I told 'em you were to-home, ma'am, and they sent up their names, but I
ha'n't got 'em, jist."

There was no help for it--Mrs. James must go down to receive her
callers. She had to smile when she felt little like it--to be sociable
when her thoughts were busy with her task. Her friends made a long
call--they had nothing else to do with their time, and when they went,
others came. In very unsatisfactory chit-chat, her morning slipped away.

On the next day, Mr. James invited company to tea, and her morning was
devoted to preparing for it; she did not enter her study. On the day
following, a sick-head-ache confined her to her bed, and on Saturday the
care of the baby devolved upon her, as Amy had extra work to do. Thus
passed the first week.

True to her promise, Mrs. James patiently persevered for a month, in her
efforts to secure for herself this little fragment of her broken time,
but with what success, the first week's history can tell. With its
close, closed the month of December.

On the last day of the old year, she was so much occupied in her
preparations for the morrow's festival, that the last hour of the day
was approaching, before she made her good night's call in the nursery.
She first went to the crib and looked at the baby. There he lay in his
innocence and beauty, fast asleep. She softly stroked his golden
hair--she kissed gently his rosy cheek--she pressed the little dimpled
hand in hers, and then, carefully drawing the coverlet over it, tucked
it in, and stealing yet another kiss--she left him to his peaceful
dreams and sat down on her daughter's bed. She also slept sweetly, with
her dolly hugged to her bosom. At this her mother smiled, but soon grave
thoughts entered her mind, and these deepened into sad ones. She thought
of her disappointment and the failure of her plans. To her, not only the
past month but the whole past year, seemed to have been one of fruitless
effort--all broken and disjointed--even her hours of religious duty had
been encroached upon, and disturbed. She had accomplished nothing, that
she could see, but to keep her house and family in order, and even this,
to her saddened mind, seemed to have been but indifferently done. She
was conscious of yearnings for a more earnest life than this.
Unsatisfied longings for something which she had not attained, often
clouded what, otherwise, would have been a bright day to her; and yet
the causes of these feelings seemed to lie in a dim and misty region,
which her eye could not penetrate.

What then did she need? To see some _results_ from her life's work? To
know that a golden cord bound her life-threads together into _unity_ of
purpose--notwithstanding they seemed, so often, single and broken?

She was quite sure that she felt no desire to shrink from duty, however
humble, but she sighed for some comforting assurance of what _was duty_.
Her employments, conflicting as they did with her tastes, seemed to her
frivolous and useless. It seemed to her that there was some better way
of living, which she, from deficiency in energy of character, or of
principle, had failed to discover. As she leaned over her child, her
tears fell fast upon its young brow.

Most earnestly did she wish, that she could shield that child from the
disappointments and mistakes and self-reproach from which the mother was
then suffering; that the little one might take up life where she could
give it to her--all mended by her own experience. It would have been a
comfort to have felt, that in fighting the battle, she had fought for
both; yet she knew that so it could not be--that for ourselves must we
all learn what are those things which "make for our peace."

The tears were in her eyes, as she gave the good-night to her sleeping
daughter--then with soft steps she entered an adjoining room, and there
fairly kissed out the old year on another chubby cheek, which nestled
among the pillows. At length she sought her own rest.

Soon she found herself in a singular place. She was traversing a vast
plain. No trees were visible, save those which skirted the distant
horizon, and on their broad tops rested wreaths of golden clouds. Before
her was a female, who was journeying towards that region of light.
Little children were about her, now in her arms, now running by her
side, and as they travelled, she occupied herself in caring for them.
She taught them how to place their little feet--she gave them timely
warnings of the pit-falls--she gently lifted them over the
stumbling-blocks. When they were weary, she soothed them by singing of
that brighter land, which she kept ever in view, and towards which she
seemed hastening with her little flock. But what was most remarkable
was, that, all unknown to her, she was constantly watched by two angels,
who reposed on two golden clouds which floated above her. Before each
was a golden book, and a pen of gold. One angel, with mild and loving
eyes, peered constantly over her right shoulder--another kept as strict
watch over her left. Not a deed, not a word, not a look, escaped their
notice. When a good deed, word, look, went from her, the angel over the
right shoulder with a glad smile, wrote it down in his book; when an
evil, however trivial, the angel over the left shoulder recorded it in
his book--then with sorrowful eyes followed the pilgrim until he
observed penitence for the wrong, upon which he dropped a tear on the
record, and blotted it out, and both angels rejoiced.

To the looker-on, it seemed that the traveller did nothing which was
worthy of such careful record. Sometimes she did but bathe the weary
feet of her little children, but the angel over the _right
shoulder_--wrote it down. Sometimes she did but patiently wait to lure
back a little truant who had turned his face away from the distant
light, but the angel over the _right shoulder_--wrote it down. Sometimes
she did but soothe an angry feeling or raise a drooping eye-lid, or kiss
away a little grief; but the angel over the right shoulder--_wrote it
down_.

Sometimes, her eye was fixed so intently on that golden horizon, and she
became so eager to make progress thither, that the little ones, missing
her care, did languish or stray. Then it was that the angel over the
_left shoulder_, lifted his golden pen, and made the entry, and followed
her with sorrowful eyes, until he could blot it out. Sometimes she
seemed to advance rapidly, but in her haste the little ones had fallen
back, and it was the sorrowing angel who recorded her progress.
Sometimes so intent was she to gird up her loins and have her lamp
trimmed and burning, that the little children wandered away quite into
forbidden paths, and it was the angel over the _left shoulder_ who
recorded her diligence.

Now the observer as she looked, felt that this was a faithful and true
record, and was to be kept to that journey's end. The strong clasps of
gold on those golden books, also impressed her with the conviction that,
when they were closed, it would only be for a future opening.

Her sympathies were warmly enlisted for the gentle traveller, and with a
beating heart she quickened her steps that she might overtake her. She
wished to tell her of the angels keeping watch above her--to entreat her
to be faithful and patient to the end--for her life's work was all
written down--every item of it--and the _results_ would be known when
those golden books should be unclasped. She wished to beg of her to
think no duty trivial which must be done, for over her right shoulder
and over her left were recording angels, who would surely take note of
all!

Eager to warn the traveller of what she had seen, she touched her. The
traveller turned, and she recognized or seemed to recognize _herself_.
Startled and alarmed she awoke in tears. The gray light of morning
struggled through the half-open shutter, the door was ajar and merry
faces were peeping in.

"Wish you a happy new year, mamma,"--"Wish you a _Happy new Year_"--"a
happy noo ear."

She returned the merry greeting most heartily. It seemed to her as if
she had entered upon a new existence. She had found her way through the
thicket in which she had been entangled, and a light was now about her
path. The _Angel over the Right Shoulder_ whom she had seen in her
dream, would bind up in his golden book her life's work, if it were but
well done. He required of her no great deeds, but faithfulness and
patience to the end of the race which was set before her. Now she could
see plainly enough, that though it was right and important for her to
cultivate her own mind and heart, it was equally right and equally
important, to meet and perform faithfully all those little household
cares and duties on which the comfort and virtue of her family depended;
for into these things the angels carefully looked--and these duties and
cares acquired a dignity from the strokes of that golden, pen--they
could not be neglected without danger.

Sad thoughts and sadder misgivings--undefined yearnings and ungratified
longings seemed to have taken their flight with the Old Year, and it was
with fresh resolution and cheerful hope, and a happy heart, she welcomed
the _Glad_ New Year. The _Angel over the Right Shoulder_ would go with
her, and if she were found faithful, would strengthen and comfort her to
its close.

END.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Angel Over the Right Shoulder
by Elizabeth Wooster Stuart Phelps

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ANGEL OVER THE RIGHT SHOULDER ***

***** This file should be named 11033.txt or 11033.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/1/0/3/11033/

Produced by Internet Archive; University of Florida, Children, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


