Project Gutenberg's Dew Drops, Vol. 37, No. 7, February 15, 1914, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Dew Drops, Vol. 37, No. 7, February 15, 1914

Author: Various

Release Date: November 22, 2004 [EBook #14116]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DEW DROPS ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Ronald Holder, John Hagerson, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team.







DEW DROPS

VOL. 37. NO. 7. WEEKLY.

DAVID C. COOK PUBLISHING CO., ELGIN, ILLINOIS.
GEORGE E. COOK, EDITOR.

FEBRUARY 15, 1914.


How Arthur Made Valentines

By MAY G. MOOAR


Arthur had a box of paints given him for Christmas, and he had learned
to color pictures very prettily; so just as he was finishing the dress
of a gorgeous Japanese lady such a happy thought came to him that he
nearly spilled some yellow paint all over Miss Matsuki's gay pink
dress, in his haste to find mother and tell her about it.

"I want to make my valentines all myself this year," he exclaimed
excitedly as soon as the yellow paint was safely back in the box, "for
now I can paint. Why can't I paint some valentines, same's Aunt
Frances did last year?"

"Why, I think you could, dear," mother answered.

"'Course I don't mean I could make quite such lovely flowers as she
did," Arthur went on, "but I think it would be lots more fun to do it
myself than to buy them."

"So do I, Arthur," mother said, "and I think if you look through those
papers in the lower drawer you'll find some pictures to cut out that
would make pretty valentines. Then you could color them with your
paints and paste them on a sheet of note paper."

"But, mother, don't valentines have some verses written on them
besides the pictures? Aunt Frances' did. Where can I get those?"

"Perhaps I could write those for you," mother laughed, "if I tried
real hard."

"Could you really write verses?" Arthur asked in round-eyed wonder.
"Then we'll have some lovely valentines, won't we? I'll make one for
you, and one for father, and Alice and John and Clifton and Barbara
and oh, lots of folks."

"Well, I guess you better get to work right away, if you've such a lot
to do," advised mother, "and I had better begin on the poetry."

It was fun to find the pictures, for there were such a lot to select
from, and by supper time Arthur had a nice pile all ready to paint
next morning.

Two days before Valentine's day they were all done--prettily colored
and pasted on note paper with a little verse that mother had written,
printed in Arthur's very best writing.

[Illustration: _Arthur decorates the valentines with his new paints
while mother writes the verses_.]

"Aren't they bee-u-ti-ful," he exclaimed as he laid them in a row on
the dining-room table.

"They are very nice, dear," mother said, "and which do you think are
the prettiest ones?"

Arthur looked a long time at the row of little valentines and then he
said, "These two." One had a little curly-haired child carrying a big
bunch of flowers in her hand, and the verse read:

    "This bunch of roses I'm bringing,
      Is a valentine for you,
    To show that in storm or in sunshine
      My love is always true."

And the other valentine had a picture of two little boys carrying a
big basket between them, and this was the little verse:

    "What do you s'pose our basket holds?
      Give guess one and two.
    You'll never think, so I must tell:
      It's full of love for you."

"And to whom are you going to give the two prettiest ones?" asked
mother.

An earnest look came into Arthur's eyes.

"I fought I'd send the little-girl one to that lame boy at the corner.
I don't know him very well, but he looks kind of lonely, you said,
mother. Don't you s'pose he'd like it?"

Mother nodded. "And who is to have the other?"

A little hand stole into mother's, and two brown eyes full of love
were lifted to mother's face.

"That is for you," he said.


       *       *       *       *       *


"BOB'S LOST HIS TEMPER."

Uncle Will, visiting in the family, heard this remark quite often. One
day he said to Bob:

"I think it rather a fortunate loss, don't you?"

"What?" asked Bob, in surprise. "It wasn't a very good one, you know.
If I were you I'd try to get a better one, and then never lose it."

Good advice for Bob.


       *       *       *       *       *


GOING ALONE.


"I'm afraid will have to go alone this morning, Harlis," said mamma.
"My head is getting worse instead of better. You think it will be all
right for Harlis to go, don't you, papa?"

Mrs. Wentworth looked up inquiringly into the face of a tall man who
had just entered the room.

"Certainly. He is big enough, and knows the way. Why not let him go?"
her husband answered.

Harlis was quite proud to hear that opinion, and adopting something of
his papa's emphatic tone, he said, "Of course, I'm big enough, mamma.
Willie Nelson goes every single Sunday alone, and he isn't only two
weeks older than I am. You needn't worry a bit. I'll take Esther, too,
if you want me to. I'll take care of her."

Mamma smiled a little as she answered, "No, dear, I thank you just the
same, but Annie will take care of Esther this morning. If I let you go
alone, you must promise to go straight to Sunday-school."

"Yes, mamma," answered Harlis, very willingly.

Proudly he walked down the street. He felt sure everyone was noticing
him. One of the newsboys ran past him and shouted, "Hello, little
chap!" and grinned.

Mamma had said, "Be a good boy, Harlis," before he left home. He
couldn't help feeling how foolish it was for her always to say that,
but he excused her with the thought that it was probably mamma-like to
be a little anxious and worried about such things.

"Harlis! Harlis!"

Harlis was just entering one of the chief business streets through
which he had to pass to reach the church. He turned and saw Willie
Nelson running as fast as his little legs could carry him to catch up.

"All alone?" Willie asked.

"Yes."

"So'm I. My mamma can't come to Sunday-school. She makes me go,
though. I don't care much. Let's go this way."

"No. I can't. Mamma said for me to go just the same way I always did.
I promised."

"Did you? My, I go the way I want to. This is just as good as any," he
added cheerfully. "Let's look in here. Ain't that fine?"

It was a display in the candy shop they were looking at. Across the
window, hung from the gas jet by ribbons, was a huge candy cane.

"See that," said Willie, pulling out from his pocket a five-cent
piece. "Know what I am going to do with it?"

"Take it to Miss Beatrice for the poor little girl she told about."

"No, sir. Going to get some candy. Five cents don't get much, though.
Not the best kind. That costs money."

Harlis put his hand in his pocket and quickly pulled it out. But the
action did not escape Willis' sharp eyes.

"You got any?" he asked.

"Yes."

"Let's see. Oh, a nickel! Thought maybe it was just a penny. What a
lot ten cents would get. What kind do you like best?"

"I like chocolate best."

"Do you? Why, so do I. Say we get some?"

"I don't believe mamma would like it. She said we mustn't buy things
on Sunday."

"She'll never know. That's nothing bad, either."

When the collection basket was passed around, Harlis looked almost
ready to cry. "Did you forget your money?" said Miss Beatrice,
pleasantly. Harlis so seldom came without it that it was noticeable.

"Yes'm," answered the little boy, almost without thinking what he was
saying. He was so uncomfortable, and Willie was making eyes at him.

"Never mind, bring it next Sunday," said Miss Beatrice, noticing the
flushed face and telltale eyes, and not understanding quite what it
meant.

If mamma had not been sick, the trouble would surely have come out
earlier, because mamma would have seen in a minute that something was
wrong. After the late dinner, there was nothing to do but cuddle up in
the corner of the sofa with his books. Just as it was growing dark,
papa came down from the sick room. He found Harlis with his head
buried in the sofa cushion.

"What's the matter?" said papa briskly, picking up his little boy.
"Lonesome? Too bad! Thought you went to Aunt Lucy's with Esther."

"I didn't want to," said Harlis, breaking out in big, shaking sobs.

Papa knew something was wrong, then, and by degrees the story came
out.

Papa said very little, for he seemed to understand the real suffering
Harlis had already gone through because of his wrongdoings.

"But the nickel was mine," said Harlis, as he and mamma were talking
it over.

"Was it?" said mamma. "What did I give it to you for?"

"For the poor little girl."

"You can put it back, but you must earn it," she said.

"Oh, I will! I will!" Harlis was only too glad to do this. "And I'll
never do so again, mamma."

And his mamma felt sure he never would.

--_Written for Dew Drops by Florence Maule._

       *       *       *       *       *


THE LIGHT OF A SMILE.


    If it drizzles and pours,
      Is there any reason
    The weather indoors
      Should be dull, like the season?
    There is something makes bright
      The cloudiest places;
    Can you guess? 'Tis the light
      Of the smiles on your faces.
                       --_Selected_.

       *       *       *       *       *


Mother's Valentines

By Elizabeth P. Allan


"Davie boy, I wish you would get up early to-morrow morning," said
Mrs. Forbes; "I want your help in sending out some valentines."

Davie opened his sleepy eyes wide. "Why, mother," he said, "I did not
know that _you_ were in the valentine business!"

"There hasn't been a fourteenth of February since I can remember,"
answered his mother smiling, "that I haven't sent out at least one
valentine. Do you know what Valentine Day means, Davie?"

"It means sending funny pictures to the other fellows," grinned Davie.

"First of all, it means a Love Day," said Mrs. Forbes, "and valentines
are supposed to be sweethearts' love letters. But I don't see why
sweethearts should have a corner on love, do you, Davie?"

[Illustration: _Davie helps mother deliver a new kind of valentine._]

"What sort of valentines do you send, mother?" asked the little boy.
His curiosity had waked him up and made him forget that the hands of
the clock had left his bedtime far behind.

"My valentines used to be made of little pictures cut out and pasted
on a card or a piece of note paper, when I was no older than you,"
said Davie's mother; "and my mother used to write on them in her fine,
copy-book hand, little verses like this:

    "'The rose is red,
    The violet's blue,
    Sugar's sweet,
    And so are you!'"

Davie laughed aloud at the idea of his mother ever having been such a
little girl.

"And then, when I was in my teens," she went on, "I saved my dimes and
bought fine valentines made of silver paper cut into hearts and
cupids, with what I thought beautiful 'poetry' printed on them."

"And what are your valentines like now?" asked Davie.

"You'll find them rather heavy, I'm afraid," said his mother merrily;
"you see, Davie, I have found out that Love has something else to do
besides playing with silver hearts and cupids, though that's all right
too. There are some poor and tired and lonely people in the world who
don't want you to give them money, or to offer them help on most days
of the year; it hurts their feelings. But on love-days, like
Christmas, and Thanksgiving, and Valentine's Day, you can give them a
love gift, and they are pleased. I have some like that for you to
carry around to-morrow."

When Davie came downstairs early the next morning, he brought with
him one of his cherished "Peter Rabbit" books. "Mother," he said, "I
want to begin to keep Valentine Day like you do."

So "Peter Rabbit" found himself tucked in Mrs. Tobin's bundle for Jack
Tobin, who had never had that sort of valentine, or indeed any sort,
in his life. And it was queer how all day long the thought of that new
sort of valentine he had sent out made Davie smile to himself!

       *       *       *       *       *


VALENTINES.


    The wind was blowing down our street,
      And it was snowing some;
    But I watched from the chilly porch
      To see the postman come.

    Across the street to Elsie's door;
      And then I meant to run
    Before she got the valentine--
      I knew that she'd get one.

    I knew it would be beautiful,
      With lace and hearts and things,
    And pretty verses on the leaves,
      And tied with ribbon strings.

    I knew the verses all by heart;
      I knew the bows were pink;
    The hearts were gold; the lace was white--
      Oh, what would Elsie think!

    I saw the postman come at last,
      And Elsie at the door;
    She got a valentine, sure 'nough--
      I knew she would before.

    And then I hid inside our hall;
      And, when his whistle blew,
    The postman called: "Hello! hello!--
      A valentine for you!"

    Sure 'nough, I got a valentine,
      With lace and hearts and things,
    And pretty verses on the leaves,
      And tied with ribbon strings.

    And I have wondered, ever since,
      And guessed if Elsie knew
    For sure I'd get a valentine,
      Before the postman blew,

    Just like I knew that she'd get one
      And knew her verses, too.
    I never s'posed that I'd get one--
      Do you guess Elsie knew?
    --_Written for Dew Drops by Ellen D. Masters_.


       *       *       *       *       *


A TREE TALK.


What a wonderful thing a tree is! A live thing, a useful thing, a
beautiful thing, and so common that we scarcely think of it as a
wonder at all.

Think of the great families of trees, the maple, the beech, the birch,
the hemlock, the spruce, the oak, and so on and on and on. So many
alike, and yet each one different. What a world of wonders!

In the human family there are oddities, you know, and so in the tree
family.

There is the whistling tree, for instance. It grows in the West India
Islands. It bears pods with open edges, and the wind passing through
them makes the whistling sound which gives the tree its name.

Then there is the cow tree, which yields a delicious creamy milk. This
tree grows in South America, and often looks like a dead tree, but if
it is tapped the milk will flow out freely. Sunrise is "milking time,"
when the natives come with their jugs and fill them with the sweet,
nourishing fluid.--_Selected_.

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

TWENTY VALENTINES

By Marion Mallette Thornton


"Oh," said Millicent, watching the postman's blue coat up the street.
"I wish he would come here day after to-morrow and bring me twenty
valentines!"

"Will he, Mitty?" Jimmy-Boy asked eagerly.

Millicent shook her head. "'Course not, Jimmy-Boy. I know only six
little girls; I couldn't get but six."

Aunt Sara was listening. She was Millicent's very prettiest auntie
from the city, and she nearly always found a way to help.

"How would you like to _send_ twenty valentines?" she asked.

Millicent laughed. "Why, auntie, I couldn't send but six, either. I
don't know any more girls. Besides, I haven't any more valentines."

"Suppose I should show you how to make twenty valentines, and find
twenty little girls to send them to; would you like, to do it?"

Millicent came running from the window with Jimmy-Boy close behind
her.

"I'd love to, auntie! Please show me right away."

"Love to, auntie, right away," echoed Jimmy-Boy.

"You can help," Aunt Sara promised. "You can bring the mucilage while
Millicent gets the scissors."

When they came back with these, Aunt Sara had a pile of gay pictures
on the table, and some sheets of thick white paper.

"We will cut this into hearts," she said, "and you can cut out these
birds and flowers and paste them on. Let's see which can make the
neatest and prettiest ones."

Jimmy-Boy had to be helped a little in cutting out pictures, but he
had learned to paste neatly at kindergarten, and his valentines were
so pretty it was hard for Aunt Sara to choose between his and
Millicent's.

It was such fun making them that Millicent almost forgot about the
twenty little girls they were to go to.

[Illustration: "_Let's see who can make the neatest and prettiest
ones_."]

"Who are they, auntie?" she asked when she remembered. "Where do they
live?"

"Away down in the city," Aunt Sara explained. "Each one in a little
white bed in a Children's Hospital. I don't know their names, but I'll
send them to the superintendent, and they will get them safely on
Valentine's Day. You can't think how happy they will be."

"Oh, I just like to try to think!" cried Millicent. "I'm glad we made
them so nice."

The twenty valentines went off in their white envelopes the next
morning.

On Valentine's Day the postman brought Milly six from the six little
girls and two from Jimmy-Boy and Aunt Sara. They were lovely, and
there were some for Jimmy-Boy, but they did not please the children
nearly as much as a letter that came a week later.

It was from the hospital superintendent and said: "I wish you could
have seen my dear little sick girls smile when they saw their pretty
valentines. They looked at them all day and slept with them under
their pillows at night. One tiny girl kept hers in her hand. They all
send a big 'Thank-you' to Millicent and Jimmy-Boy."

"Next year we'll begin sooner and make forty," Millicent decided;
"it's lots more fun than getting them, isn't it, Jimmy-Boy?"

       *       *       *       *       *


HAROLD'S SHETLAND PONY.


On Harold's birthday Uncle George gave him a Shetland pony.

I never saw anyone so surprised as Harold was. He thanked his uncle so
many times that I thought Uncle George would be all tired out saying,
"You're welcome."

The week of the Flower Festival here in Santa Barbara, where we live,
Harold drove his pony in the parade.

The carriage was all covered with pink roses. There were roses all
over the canopy top, and all over the dashboard, and along the sides,
and up the back, and on the seat where Harold sat. And the pony had a
collar of roses, and the roses were wreathed in the harness and wound
in the wheels.

Harold enjoyed the parade very much, but he never thought of taking a
prize till the money was sent to him. He was as pleased as could be.

"What will you buy with the money, Harold?" I asked.

"Well, you see," said Harold, "the money doesn't really belong to me.
It belongs to the Shetland pony, and I would like to talk about what
would be the nicest thing to do for the pony."

So we all talked about it and decided that the nicest thing we could
do for the pony would be to put a big screen window in the front of
his stall, so he would not be troubled with flies.--_Selected_.

       *       *       *       *       *


FLO'S VALENTINE


    "I wonder where I'd better send
      This valentine." said Flo;
    "It's pretty, and my dearest friend
      Would like it much, I know.

    "My dearest friend is Nelly May;
      She'll have a lot, I s'pose;
    She always does, for she's a girl
      'Most everybody knows.

    "I want to send it awful bad
      To Nelly May, for she
    Will likely send her loveliest one
      To her dear friend--that's me.

    "But there is little Molly Jones--
      She said, the other day.
    She'd never had a valentine
      In all her life; now say,

    "I've half a mind to send her this;
      'Twill s'prise her so, you see.
    That won't be selfish, for I know
      She'll not send one to me.

    "And Nelly May won't miss it, for
      She'll have so many; so
    I'll start right off and mail it now
      As quick as I can go."
    --_Written for Dew Drops by Helen M. Richardson_.


       *       *       *       *       *


HOW BLANCA SAVED THE KITTENS.


Blanca was a pretty fox terrier who lived on the fourth floor of a big
apartment house, and the four kittens were her adopted family. For
when the kittens' mother died and left them wee, helpless babies,
Blanca at once proved the kindness of her heart by taking and caring
for them as if they had been her very own.

One day a great danger came to Blanca and her family, as well as to
everyone else in the building. A blue mist began to drift through the
halls, there was the smell of smoke, then someone cried "Fire!" and
the people in the different flats rushed out of their rooms in a
panic.

Quickly a big, shiny, brass fire engine rattled up, followed by the
hose cart, and the wagon loaded with long ladders if they should be
needed. The firemen rushed in, dragging lengths of hose, the smoke
grew thicker and the confusion worse.

Some of the people were so frightened that they did not know what they
were doing. But there was one who did not lose her presence of mind,
and that was the little dog. When the first alarm was given, Blanca
ran down to see what it all meant. But she was not satisfied to be
safe herself, and leave her foster babies in danger. Up she went
again, up the stairways filled with firemen and excited tenants to the
top floor, and down she came jumping over hose pipe, dodging between
firemen's legs, with a kitten in her mouth.

This she carried out and laid down where it would be safe, then
started back again through smoke and flame and heat. Four times she
made the trip to the top floor, and each time she came back with a
kitten in her mouth. Nor did she rest till they were all out of
danger.

All the people who had watched the little dog said how brave she was.
And so we all say. But what made Blanca brave was because she thought
of the kittens instead of herself.--_Written for Dew Drops by Adele E.
Thompson_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Learn to treat everybody with respect and consideration.

       *       *       *       *       *

A good friend is worth trying to keep.

       *       *       *       *       *


OUR LESSON--For Feb. 15.

       *       *       *       *       *

PREPARED BY MARGUERITE COOK.

       *       *       *       *       *


Title.--Christ's Hatred of Shams.--Luke 11:37-54.

Golden Text.--Be not deceived; God is not mocked--Gal. 6:7.

_Beginners Golden Text_.--_The day is thine, the night also is
thine_.--Ps. 74:16.

Truth.--God looketh upon the heart.

1. One day when Jesus was teaching the people a Pharisee invited him
to dine with him.

[Illustration]

2. Jesus went with him, for he hoped to be able to teach him how to
truly love and serve God.

[Illustration]

3. The Pharisee was surprised that Jesus sat down to the table to eat
without first washing his hands.

[Illustration]

4. Jesus told him that it was true that the Pharisees made much of
washing their hands but that their hearts were far from clean.

[Illustration]

5. Jesus told him that God made the soul as well as the body and
wanted the soul kept clean and pure.

[Illustration]

6. They loved to be thought great and good but were selfish and
unkind.

7. When they prayed or gave alms to the poor it was to be seen and
praised by others.

[Illustration]

8. Jesus also blamed those who made life hard for others and made
things easy for themselves.

9. God looks into our hearts and sees what we really are.

10. It is useless for us to try to deceive God.

11. He knows all the time if we have wicked, selfish, impure hearts,
no matter how hard we try to seem good.

12. To please God we must have pure hearts and live pure, true, loving
lives.

       *       *       *       *       *

QUESTIONS.

What is the Golden Text?

What is the Truth?

1. Who invited Jesus to dine with him?

2. What did Jesus hope to be able to teach him?

3. At what was the Pharisee surprised?

4. What did Jesus tell him about the hearts of the Pharisees?

5. What did Jesus tell him about the body and soul?

6. Although they loved to be thought great and good, what were they?

7. Why did they pray and give alms to the poor?

8. Whom did Jesus also blame?

9. When God looks into our hearts what does he see?

10. What is it useless for us to try to do?

11. What does he know?

12. What must we do to please God?

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON HYMN.

_Tune_--"Jesus loves me, this I know," omitting chorus (E flat).

    We should all be very sure
    That our hearts are good and pure;
    Jesus knows if we are true,
    He knows all we say or do.

       *       *       *       *       *

Title of Lesson for Feb. 22.

Faith Destroying Fear.--Luke 12: 1-12.

       *       *       *       *       *

Golden Text for Feb. 22.

Every one who shall confess me before men, him shall the Son of man
also confess before the angels of God.--Luke 12:8.

       *       *       *       *       *

Beginners Golden Text for Feb. 22.

_He careth for you_.--1 Peter 5:7.

       *       *       *       *       *


Advice to Boys and Girls


Freddy's Way.


When the clock struck eleven, Freddy turned from the window where he
had been watching for nearly an hour and he said: "Guess Dan has
forgotten to come for me. I think I'd better write a letter to
mother." His aunt, whom he was visiting, answered:

"That will be a sensible thing to do, dear."

Freddy worked very hard on his letter. When it was finished, he said:
"It doesn't look as nice as it might, but I guess mother will know I
tried to do my best." His aunt replied:

"I'm sure she will, anyway, the main thing was to keep your promise
and write to her."

Presently, Freddy took his cap and went outdoors to find amusement for
himself; it was a beautiful warm day, just the kind when a boy loves
to go swimming, and he thought longingly of the river. But his aunt
did not wish him to go alone, and for some reason Dan had failed to
call for him. The next-door neighbor was mowing his lawn and Freddy
asked: "Need any help?" The man answered:

"Sure, I was just wishing for a boy to rake the grass."

Freddy set about his work whistling and the neighbor never guessed
that his small helper had had a disappointment that morning. It was
Freddy's happy way when he could not do one thing to find another and
do that cheerily.--_Written for Dew Drops by Marie Deacon Hanson_.

       *       *       *       *       *

A Good Rule.


    We have the wisest teacher, and she has
      given this rule
    That helps us in our lessons--you can use
      it in your school.
    Always add a smile or two when things
      are going wrong,
    Subtract the frowns that try to come
      when lessons seem too long,
    Then multiply your efforts when the
      figures won't come right,
    Divide your pleasures day by day with
      every one in sight
    Now if you always use this rule you'll
      have a happy day,
    For lessons then are easy, and the hours
      fly away.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Entered at the Post Office at Elgin, Ill., as Second Class Mail
Matter.]

Price of Dew Drops.--In lots of five or more, to one address, 20 cents
per copy per year, or 5-1/2 cents per copy per quarter. Address,

DAVID C. COOK PUBLISHING CO., ELGIN, ILL.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Dew Drops, Vol. 37, No. 7, February
15, 1914, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DEW DROPS ***

***** This file should be named 14116.txt or 14116.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/4/1/1/14116/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Ronald Holder, John Hagerson, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

