Project Gutenberg's Manners And Conduct In School And Out, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Manners And Conduct In School And Out

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: December 21, 2004 [EBook #14408]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MANNERS AND CONDUCT ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Melissa Er-Raqabi and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team










MANNERS AND CONDUCT
IN SCHOOL AND OUT

BY

THE DEANS OF GIRLS IN
CHICAGO HIGH SCHOOLS


    _The gentle minde by gentle deeds is knowne; For a man by nothing
    is so well bewrayed As by his manners._

    --SPENSER


ALLYN AND BACON
BOSTON NEW YORK CHICAGO
ATLANTA SAN FRANCISCO




COPYRIGHT, 1921,
BY FANNY R. SMITH.



Norwood Press
J.S. Gushing Co.--Berwick & Smith Co.
Norwood, Mass., U.S.A.




FOREWORD


"The supreme business of the school is to develop a sense of justice,
the power of initiative, independence of character, correct social and
civic habits, and the ability to cooperate toward the common good."--Dr.
Frank Crane.

How do you develop correct social habits, the habits of a gentleman or a
lady?

You develop correct social habits just as you develop correct habits in
playing ball, or in swimming,--you discover the rules; then you
practise, practise, practise. A good general rule is, Do what a kind
heart prompts; for,

    Politeness is to do and say
    The kindest thing in the kindest way.

We earnestly hope this little book may help girls and boys to become
happier, more agreeable, and more effective citizens.

THE DEANS OF GIRLS,
CHICAGO HIGH SCHOOLS.




MAXIMS OF CONDUCT


    Let us have faith that right makes might; and in that faith let us
    dare to do our duty as we understand it.

    --LINCOLN.

    Whatever is worth doing at all, is worth doing well.

    --EARL OF CHESTERFIELD.

    Do not squander time, for that is the stuff life is made of.

    --FRANKLIN.

    The secret of success is constancy of purpose.

    --DISRAELI.

    Evil communications corrupt good manners.

    --NEW TESTAMENT.

    Be good, sweet maid, and let who will be clever;
      Do noble things, not dream them, all day long;
    And so make life, death, and that vast forever
      One grand sweet song.

    --KINGSLEY.

    Vice is a monster of so frightful mien,
    As to be hated needs but to be seen;
    Yet seen too oft, familiar with her face,
    We first endure, then pity, then embrace.

    --POPE.

    In vain we call old notions fudge,
      And bend our conscience to our dealing;
    The Ten Commandments will not budge,
      And stealing will continue stealing.

    --LOWELL.




GREETING

    _Life is not so short but that there is always time enough for
    courtesy._

    --Emerson.


Girls, the word _lady_ should suggest, ideally, a girl (or a woman) who
keeps herself physically fit, her thinking on a high plane, and her
manners gentle and winsome.

Boys, the word _gentleman_ means, ideally, a fine, athletic, manly
fellow who is an all round good sport in the best sense, and who has
manners that do not prevent other people from seeing how fine he is.




THE STREET

    _Remember this,--that there is a proper dignity and proportion to
    be observed in the performance of every act of life._

    --Marcus Aurelius.


1) If you are well brought up, girls, you will not loiter on the street
to talk to one another; much less to boys. Street visiting is taboo.

2) Boys, a gentleman does not detain on street corners a girl or woman
friend. If he meets one with whom he wishes to speak more than a moment,
he asks permission to walk a little way with her. During the moment that
he does detain her, a gentleman talks with his hat in his hand.

3) You know that a boy should lift his hat or cap in recognition of a
girl or woman acquaintance whom he meets on the street. But perhaps you
don't know that the same courtesy may well be offered to a man, and must
be, if the man is walking with a girl or a woman.

4) To spit on the street or sidewalk is likely to endanger the health of
others, and to make you seem vulgar and "horrid." Use your handkerchief.




THE STREET-CAR

    _Immodest words admit of no defence,
    For want of decency is want of sense._

    --Earl of Roscommon.


1) Avoid rushing ahead of others to secure a seat in a street-car, or to
secure any other special advantage. Some one must be last; why not you?
If advancing out of turn is necessary, a little deliberation accompanied
with, "I beg your pardon," or "Excuse me, please" will most quickly and
pleasantly open the way; otherwise, respect "the line."

2) In a street-car, boys, you should touch your hat politely and offer
your seat to a woman, a girl, or an elderly man who is standing. Your
courtesy should be accepted with a bow and, "Thank you."

3) Girls, if a seat is offered you, accept it at once with "Thank you."
Don't explain that you don't mind standing.

4) On the street, in street-cars, and in all public places, if your
voice or conduct attracts attention you will be considered "loud,"
"common," vulgar.

5) The chewing of gum in a street-car, in church, or in any other place
outside of your own private room stamps you at once as "common."




CORRIDORS

    _Liberty exists in proportion to wholesome restraint._

    --Webster.


1) Avoid all running in the corridors; start in time, and walk.

2) Avoid crowding on stairways. Avoid crowding through Assembly Hall
doors. When in a mass of people, move slowly and try to keep breathing
space about yourself.

3) Avoid tossing paper on to the lockers. Avoid dropping it on the
floor; but if paper is there, train yourself to see it and to pick up at
least one piece every time you enter the corridor. This is what Dr.
Crane calls a "civic habit."

4) Boys, hats off on entering the building; don't put them on again
before you are at the outer door ready to leave, even though you should
see grown men violating this rule.

5) Hold a door open for a girl or an older person to precede you in
passing through; then glance over your shoulder to prevent the door from
swinging back into the face of any person who may be following.

6) In order to appear to the best advantage, keep your hands out of your
pockets.

7) Try not to jostle one another. If by chance you do, say, "Pardon
me."

8) Observe, boys, that well-bred men rise when addressed by a woman who
is standing.

9) Avoid whistling in the school building, and even in a private home,
for your whistling may be annoying to some who cannot help hearing it.

10) Never, never, be so disgusting as to spit on the floor, on the
stairs, or into the waste-paper box; use your handkerchief.

11) Care for your finger-nails, your face, your hair, in your room at
home, not before mirrors on your locker doors, or in any other public
place. After making your toilet as well as you can, forget it.

12) Boys, it is not necessary to help the girls mount the stairs in
school unless they are blind or crippled.

13) Girls, it is better not to twine your arms about one another in the
corridors and on the stairs; also, not to kiss one another tenderly if
you separate for a few moments. Love your friends dearly; but be
sensible, not sentimental.

14) Boys, observe that the moment a woman or a girl enters a passenger
elevator, gentlemen there remove their hats,--unless conditions prevent.




CLASSROOM

    _In words, as fashions, the same rule will hold,
    Alike fantastic if too new or old:
    Be not the first by whom the new are tried,
    Nor yet the last to lay the old aside._

    --Pope.


1) When you enter your classroom, as well as when you leave it, glance
towards your teacher and, if she is looking, bow pleasantly.

2) Say, "Yes, Miss Brown"; not merely "Yes," if you know the name of the
one addressed. If you do not know her name, let your tone and manner
indicate so fully your feeling of respect that the omission of the name
will not be noted. Say "Yes, Sir," to men. And remember,--

    Hearts, like doors, will ope with ease
    To very, very little keys;
    And don't forget that two of these
    Are: "Thank you, sir," and "If you please."

3) When sitting, push back as far as you can in the chair and lean
forward from your hips, keeping your spine straight, not curved. The way
you sit or walk or stand shows culture or lack of it.

4) When reciting, stand erect with your hands at your sides. Your
attitude will invite favorable attention if you stand with one foot
slightly in advance of the other, and the weight of the body on the
forward foot.

5) Speak so distinctly that everyone in the room must hear you;
otherwise, not everyone will get your thought.

6) Avoid raising your hand when you wish to ask or to answer a question.
Instead, rise quietly, face your teacher, and wait for her to recognize
you as though you were at a club meeting.

7) Never "tell" when another is trying to recite. Such "telling"
destroys the other person's chance to think, and helps to make a sneak
of you.




LUNCH ROOM

    _Cleanness of body was ever deemed to proceed from a due reverence
    of God._

    --Bacon.


1) See that your hands are clean.

2) Avoid rushing into or through the Lunch Room. Walk.

3) When carrying your food to your table, pay strict attention to
getting it to its destination in safety.

4) Eat in the Lunch Room,--not in the corridors, nor in the Assembly
Hall, nor on the street. Give four excellent reasons for this direction.

5) Eat slowly and noiselessly; don't "feed." Avoid talking when your
mouth is full. Take small mouthfuls, so that you may talk without giving
offense. Keep your lips closed when chewing. Never use your knife to
carry food to your mouth.

6) In the Lunch Room, as elsewhere, sit with your knees together and
with both of your feet on the floor, not on the rounds of your chairs.

7) Don't _throw_ paper and refuse into the receptacles provided; _drop_
it there.

8) Avoid boisterous talking and laughing. The tones of the voice
proclaim quite accurately the social background of the boy, the girl,
the man, the woman.

          Her voice was ever soft,
    Gentle, and low,--an excellent thing in woman.

    --SHAKESPEARE.

9) Keep elbows and wraps off the Lunch Room tables; furthermore, do not
sit on the tables.

10) Leave your place in the Lunch Room tidy and spotless, with your
chair pushed up to the table.

11) Rise when an older person enters the room; remain standing until
your courtesy is acknowledged, or until the older person is seated.
(Optional with the teacher in the schoolroom.)

12) Boys, when a girl or an older person drops a pencil, a book, or
anything of the sort, pick it up and return it unobtrusively, but with a
little bow.

13) Avoid rushing from the room when the bell rings. Walk.

14) Open the door, boys, but let the girls pass out first, whenever
practicable. When many are passing in opposite directions, keep to the
right.

15) Never laugh at the accidents or misfortunes of others, even if they
have a ridiculous side. Nothing shows ill-breeding so surely.

    He who laughs at others' woes
    Finds few friends and many foes.




THE ASSEMBLY HALL

    _There is a time for some things, and a time for all things;
    a time for great things, and a time for small things._

    --Cervantes.


Actions wholly appropriate to the gymnasium or the playground may be
quite out of character in the Assembly Hall. Think about it.

1) Avoid all running, romping, and making of unnecessary noise in the
Assembly Hall.

2) Avoid using the Assembly Hall as a thoroughfare. On entering, take a
seat immediately, and remain in it until the next bell rings. Talk in
gentle tones.

3) Avoid eating anything in the Assembly Hall.

4) Avoid dropping paper on the floor. Help to keep the room orderly and
tidy.

5) For a program on the stage, and for general singing, gather quietly
in the center sections if your Assembly Hall is large. You should do
this without waiting to be asked. Use your judgment.

6) The appearance on the platform of one who is to speak to you should
be your signal for immediate silence and attention. Don't wait to be
called to order; call yourselves to order.

7) Sing so well that you make the general singing a delight. You will
find it far more fun than trying to spoil the program. Why will you?
Because it is your nature to feel more satisfaction in cooperating and
helping by doing your best, than in hindering and thwarting by doing
your worst. (This is the basis of all good manners, and of civic
spirit.)

8) You should be attentive and silent, not only when some one is talking
to you from the platform and when a "number" of any kind is being given,
but also during a "movie." People who visit while others are trying to
entertain them are a public nuisance. Don't let yourselves slip into
that class. Also do not tell the plot of a play or a movie to your
neighbor.

9) Never, in the Assembly Hall or in any other place where there is a
large group of people, should you stand and beckon, whistle, or
"hoo-hoo" to attract the attention of your friends.

10) If you enter the Assembly Hall after the program has begun, find a
seat so noiselessly as to escape notice.

11) Show your appreciation cordially, but avoid excessive applause.
Never stamp your feet or whistle. Carried beyond a certain point,
applause ceases to be a courtesy. Cultivate good taste in this matter.
Moderation is a mark of good taste.




DUTY TO CLUB OR CLASS SPONSOR



    _Her air, her manners, all who saw admir'd;
    Courteous though coy, and gentle though retir'd;
    The joy of youth and health her eyes display'd,
    And ease of heart her every look convey'd._

    --Crabbe.


1) Remind your sponsor (or adviser) of your meeting two or three days in
advance of the time.

2) Before acting on any plan, be sure of the approval of your sponsor.

3) So treat your sponsor that she (or he) will delight to be with you.




THE LAVATORY

    _Cleanliness is next to godliness._

    --Wesley.


1) In school, in a store, in a club, on trains, in short, wherever you
use a public wash bowl, leave it as clean as possible.

2) Do not scatter toilet paper about. Keep the toilet rooms neat and
clean and free from all writing on doors, walls, windows.

3) Do not loiter or visit in toilet rooms.




DUTY TO YOUR CHAPERON

    _Though her mien carries much more invitation than command, to
    behold her is an immediate check to loose behaviour; to love her
    was a liberal education._

    --Steele.

At school receptions, sleigh-rides, class meetings at private homes, and
so on, there is always a chaperon, who is giving her time for your
enjoyment. Her kindness should be repaid by your courtesy.

1) As soon as possible after greeting your hostess, greet your chaperon.

2) Also, just before leaving, speak to her again cordially and
gratefully.

3) See that your chaperon is not often left alone. If the function is a
dance, invite her to dance; or sit out a dance with her, sometimes. Make
her enjoy being your chaperon.

4) Never tease to stay when the time comes to go.

5) Don't hinder your chaperon by loitering over your wraps; be ready
when she is, and leave the building with her.




DUTY TO YOUR HOSTESS

    _But evil is wrought by want of thought,
    As well as want of heart._

    --Hood.


1) Before talking with others at a party greet your hostess; then the
older people present; finally, the young people.

2) As a guest you are not expected to say good-by to everybody; but
never leave without saying good-by to your hostess and expressing
appreciation of her efforts to give you pleasure.

3) cooperate with your hostess in trying to make everyone present happy.
If you fail to pay this courtesy to your hostess, you stamp yourself as
an undesirable guest.

4) If the function is a dance, boys, avoid too many consecutive dances
with the same girl. Confining your attentions noticeably to the same
girl makes her conspicuous and mars the general pleasure.

5) Girls, decline consecutive dances with the same boy. Do it
graciously, explaining that you would like to accept, but must not be
selfish. If he is the right sort, he will understand at once, or come to
his senses later. If he is offended, don't worry about it; it is not
worth while.

6) Pay some kindly attention to the girls who do not dance all of the
time. They will feel grateful, your hostess will feel grateful, you will
feel better satisfied than if you neglect them.

7) Never refrain from dancing if any girl present is without a partner
for that number. To refrain is selfish in you, and discourteous to both
the girl and your hostess.

8) Girls, don't quit one of your friends to go and whisper with another.
Such an action is sure to be considered unkind and inconsiderate.

9) Train your eye to see how you may add to the enjoyment of all, or of
a single one, and act promptly. Incidentally, you thus add to your own
enjoyment. Often think of Tennyson's words:--

    For manners are not idle, but the fruit
    Of loyal nature and of noble mind.




DUTY TO ONE ANOTHER

    _If it is not seemly, do it not; if it is not true, speak it not._

    --Marcus Aurelius.


1) After dancing with a girl thank her and walk back with her to her
seat, to her chaperon, or to her next partner. Never leave her standing
alone in the middle of the floor.

2) Girls, if your partner doesn't dance well, take it pleasantly--but
not as too much of a joke--and help him to do better.

3) Avoid looking at a boy with your soul in your eyes. A girl holds the
key to the social situation. She should keep such a situation at school
on a cordial but wholly matter-of-fact basis,--absolutely free from
sentimentality.

4) Base your friendships on good comradeship, not on maudlin emotion,
nor on propinquity. The right kind of girl and boy friendships may give
joy for a lifetime; the wrong kind must be a continual menace.

5) Don't be prudes, girls, but let every boy know that he must keep his
hands off from you. If he presumes, a cool glance on your part will
usually restrain him. If it does not, avoid him; he is unworthy of your
friendship.

6) Boys, you can easily tell what girls would have you sit very close
to them, and hold their hands, and put your arms around them. But, be
manly. Always protect a girl; protect her from yourself, even from
herself. If she does not wish to be so protected, avoid her as you would
the plague.

7) When you call on a girl, you shouldn't remain after ten o'clock even
though the girl wants you to. Girls, you should not urge. And, girls,
observe how your boy friends fit themselves into the family group.

8) A gift you should acknowledge at once and cordially. But, boys, let
your gifts to girls be rare, and restricted to candy, books, and
flowers.

9) To force your presence upon those who seem not to want you, tends to
crystallize their feeling of antagonism. On the other hand, nothing more
quickly disarms this feeling of antagonism than evidence of delicacy on
your part.

10) Girls, it is poor policy to call up boys often by telephone, and bad
manners to whistle to attract their attention.

11) For you to sit at a social gathering with hat and coat on,
girls,--even though you must leave in a few moments,--is discourteous
both to your hostess and to the other guests.




DUTY TO OLDER PEOPLE

    _The mildest manners, and the gentlest heart._

    --Pope.


1) Show especial deference--not indifference--to your superiors in age,
office, and the like. Do this not once, but always. Watch for
opportunities.

2) Rise, when an older person who is standing begins to talk to you.

3) If you wish to become a musician, you seek help from the finest
musical instructor within reach. Just so in the greater art of living
effectively, seek help from those who have learned wisdom. As a rule,
your parents and your teachers are your best counsellors. They have
traveled the road before you, and have your highest interests at heart.
Listen to them. Don't make your life a wild experiment in blundering; it
doesn't pay.

4) Never regard age, even advanced age, as a joke. To do so blunts your
own sensibilities.




INVITATIONS

    _That man may last, but never lives,
    Who much receives, but nothing gives._

    --Gibbons.


1) If you receive a written invitation, send a written reply. Let the
reply accord with the invitation in being either formal, or informal.

2) You will be thought discourteous if you fold your note carelessly,
write on soiled or ragged paper, use pencil instead of ink, or delay
your reply.

3) Accepting an invitation binds you, in honor, to carry out your
engagement. If circumstances prevent, at once inform the one who invited
you; and do it in a considerate manner.


INTRODUCTIONS

Introduce a man to a woman, a boy to a girl, a younger person to an
older, thus: Mrs. Jones, may I present (or introduce) my friend Miss
Holbrook? or, Miss Brown, my friend Mr. Williams; or, Father, this is
Ethel Reed. Let your manner and voice be dignified and gracious, your
words simple. But _avoid_,--Mrs. Jones, meet Miss Holbrook; or, Mr.
Brown, shake hands with Mr. Smith.




DANCING REQUIREMENTS

    _Come and trip it as ye go
    On the light fantastic toe._

    --Milton.


The National Association of Dancing Masters is responsible for the
following rules. You may well think those dancers who disregard them
either ignorant, or awkward, or vulgar.

1) Face your partner at a distance of six or eight inches, bodies
parallel, shoulders parallel.

2) If you are leading, place your right hand between the shoulders of
your partner, keeping your right elbow well away from your body.

3) See that above, but not resting on this arm, is your partner's left
arm, at right angles with her body, her hand just back of the curve of
your shoulder.

4) Let your left hand, palm up, clasp your partner's right. A line from
these hands to the opposite elbows should be parallel with your parallel
bodies.

5) Remember,--bobbing and wriggling are taboo. Let the spring come from
the ankles and the knees. Imitate the grace of the swallow.




REFRESHMENTS AT PARTIES

    _Socrates said, "Bad men live that they may eat and drink, whereas
    good men eat and drink that they may live."_

    --Plutarch.


1) Keep your refreshments simple and inexpensive. After you are better
acquainted, omit them frequently.

2) Boys, you should be alert to help serve, but use your judgment; don't
go off in a group to enjoy yourselves in the business of serving or
eating.

3) Avoid dropping crumbs on the floor or scattering them over the
serving tables. Avoid placing anything hot or moist on a surface that
may be disfigured by it.

4) Pay special attention to any who seem shy or afraid to mingle with
the other guests. See that everybody has a good time.

5) Help clean up at once, boys, what should be cleaned up, and leave the
room you use in perfect order. Don't walk off and let the girls do it
all. Make yourselves useful until the work is finished.




TABLE MANNERS

    _Some hae meat and canna eat,
      And some would eat that want it;
    But we hae meat, and we can eat,
      Sae let the Lord be thankit._

    --Burns.


1) Do you know that table manners proclaim at once your social training?

2) Boys, at a dining table, draw back the chair for the girl or the
woman next to you, push it under her as she sits down, and then take
your own seat.

3) Girls and boys, let your napkin lie open across your lap.

4) At home leave your napkin folded neatly, or in its ring, if there is
a ring. But, let it lie loose beside your plate when you are at a hotel;
partly folded, when you are a guest in a private home.

5) Never use a toothpick at the table or in the presence of others. If
it seems absolutely necessary to use one at the table, cover your lips
with your napkin; elsewhere, with your handkerchief.

6) Hold your knife in your right hand, not as though it were a
penholder, but so that you may easily press down on the back of the
knife with your right forefinger.

7) In a similar position, when cutting food, hold your fork tines down
with your left hand. But, in carrying food to your mouth, have the tines
curve up, not down, and take your fork in your right hand between your
thumb and forefinger, so that it rests comfortably near the tip of the
second finger.

8) Never should your table knife be used for conveying food to your
mouth.

9) You find your small bread and butter plate and butter spreader at
your left. Never spread at once an entire slice of bread; break off a
half or a quarter and spread it on your bread and butter plate,--not on
the palm of your hand.

10) When your plate is passed for a second helping, let your knife and
fork remain on it, side by side; also, when you have finished. Never
rest your knife or fork partly on the table and partly on your plate or
your napkin ring. Avoid mixing your food on your plate.

11) Use a fork when eating vegetables and salad,--and ice-cream, if an
ice-cream fork is provided.

12) If cutting the lettuce leaves of your salad is necessary, cut with
your fork.

13) Make the least possible noise in chewing, and none at all in taking
food from a spoon. Sometimes, in eating crisp toast, for example, it is
very difficult to avoid a crunching sound, but eat slowly, taking very
small mouthfuls, and you can avoid noise.

14) Don't drink from a cup while it holds a spoon. When not using your
teaspoon, let it lie on the saucer. Do not drink from your saucer. Stir
quietly, and lay your spoon in your saucer at once.

15) At the table, keep your hands in your lap when you are not eating;
toying with articles on the table is bad form.

16) Between courses, avoid lounging back in your chair; keep your spine
straight, your body poised a little forward, and your mind occupied with
the conversation which you are helping to make pleasant.

17) Eat a little less of everything than you might. Shrink from the
slightest appearance of greediness.

18) Use knives, forks, and spoons in the order you find them. When in
doubt, observe your hostess.

19) After dipping the tips of your fingers into your finger bowl, dry
them lightly on your napkin.

20) When the hostess rises, boys, rise and draw back the chair of the
girl or the woman next you as she rises, and let her precede you from
the room.




DUTY TO YOURSELF

    _This above all: to thine own self be true,
    And it must follow, as the night the day,
    Thou canst not then be false to any man._

    --Shakespeare.


1) Take a complete bath at least three times a week; better still, every
day.

2) Keep your hair, teeth, finger nails, and clothes in good condition.
Look well groomed.

3) If you eat, sleep, and exercise properly, your health and your
complexion will be at their best. Consult your gymnasium teacher on the
subject, or consult a reliable book.

4) Girls, when you dress your hair too startlingly, wear waists that are
too low or too thin, use powder and rouge, you remind boys and men of
the wrong kind of woman. The best time for cosmetics, if you must use
them, is not during your school days.

5) Of course dress as becomingly as you can; but, in the main, rely for
your attractiveness on your attainments, your gentle manners, your tact,
and your active desire to render others comfortable and happy.

6) Cultivate charm, girls and boys. The best teacher of "How to be
charming," is a really kind heart. Every one of you can have that.

7) If your heart is kind, you will learn to talk interestingly, and to
listen intelligently.

8) Try, increasingly, to fit your word to your thought, and your thought
to the fact. Being accurate does not mean being dull. Effective speech
has much need for imagination, but very little for common slang. You
understand and enjoy,--

    These growing feathers plucked from Caesar's wing Will make him
    fly an ordinary pitch.

If, however, in slang phrase, a person spoke of "swiping Caesar's dope";
or of making Caesar "come off his perch," you would see that something
fine in the thought had vanished. Practise expressing your ideas as
attractively as possible.

9) Don't make cutting remarks about those who are absent; your wit may
win a laugh, but its unkindness will cause others to like you the less.
They will feel uncomfortable about what you may say of them in _their_
absence.

10) Whenever you are curious about the wonderful experience which we
call "birth," think of it reverently, and go at once for information to
your father or mother; if you lack these, to some high-minded friend
much older than you. Otherwise, inclose a stamped envelope addressed to
yourself in a letter to the Y.M.C.A. or the Y.W.C.A. or the Federal
Bureau of Information, Washington, D.C., asking the title of the best
book for a boy or a girl of your age, about the Beginnings of Life.

11) Never listen to explanations from the ignorant or the vulgar. Impure
thoughts on this subject lead to the ruin of both body and spirit. Pure
thoughts lead to the most precious possessions the world can give:
father, mother, sister, brother, friend, husband, wife, children, home,
country.

12) Be dependable. If any quality is _most_ desirable, it is that of
dependableness. In school you have wonderful opportunities for
cultivating it.

13) Every one of you should aim to become economically independent. To
that end, decide on a vocation and plan your studies accordingly. If you
wish to change later, very well; but always work towards a definite
goal.

14) Avoid showing your displeasure with an acquaintance by not bowing.
To do so is crude. A formal bow should be bestowed even on an enemy.
"Cut" an acquaintance only when you have reason to believe him an
utterly unfit companion.

15) "Make up" at once with a friend. "I'm sorry," helps. But in case
this fails, find a way that succeeds. Don't lose your friend.

16) Be courteous, frank, and friendly. Don't try to be popular by
attracting attention. Popularity which has to be sought is of short
duration.




HOME

    _Such is the patriot's boast, where'er we roam,--
    His first, best country ever is at home._

    --Goldsmith.


1) The finer you are, the more certain you will be to practice in your
own home every courtesy which you know is due elsewhere. If you are not
polite and considerate in your home, you cannot help showing that fact
away from home.

2) The spirit that aims at giving pleasure rather than annoyance or pain
will not wish to take any "vacation." At first, the courteous thought
and act may require conscious effort. Persistent practice, however,
crystallizes this conscious effort into confirmed habit; the result is,
a _lady_, a _gentleman_.





End of Project Gutenberg's Manners And Conduct In School And Out, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MANNERS AND CONDUCT ***

***** This file should be named 14408.txt or 14408.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/4/4/0/14408/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Melissa Er-Raqabi and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
