Project Gutenberg's An Episode Under the Terror, by Honore de Balzac

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: An Episode Under the Terror

Author: Honore de Balzac

Translator: Clara Bell and Others

Release Date: September, 1998  [Etext #1456]
Posting Date: February 25, 2010

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AN EPISODE UNDER THE TERROR ***




Produced by Dagny, and Bonnie Sala





AN EPISODE UNDER THE TERROR


By Honore De Balzac



Translated by Clara Bell and Others



                             DEDICATION

                   To Monsieur Guyonnet-Merville.

  Is it not a necessity to explain to a public curious to know
  everything, how I came to be sufficiently learned in the law to
  carry on the business of my little world? And in so doing, am I
  not bound to put on record the memory of the amiable and
  intelligent man who, meeting the Scribe (another clerk-amateur) at
  a ball, said, "Just give the office a turn; there is work for you
  there, I assure you." But do you need this public testimony to
  feel assured of the affection of the writer?

                                                        DE BALZAC.





AN EPISODE UNDER THE TERROR


On the 22nd of January, 1793, towards eight o'clock in the evening, an
old lady came down the steep street that comes to an end opposite the
Church of Saint Laurent in the Faubourg Saint Martin. It had snowed so
heavily all day long that the lady's footsteps were scarcely audible;
the streets were deserted, and a feeling of dread, not unnatural amid
the silence, was further increased by the whole extent of the Terror
beneath which France was groaning in those days; what was more, the old
lady so far had met no one by the way. Her sight had long been failing,
so that the few foot passengers dispersed like shadows in the distance
over the wide thoroughfare through the faubourg, were quite invisible to
her by the light of the lanterns.

She had passed the end of the Rue des Morts, when she fancied that she
could hear the firm, heavy tread of a man walking behind her. Then it
seemed to her that she had heard that sound before, and dismayed by the
idea of being followed, she tried to walk faster toward a brightly lit
shop window, in the hope of verifying the suspicions which had taken
hold of her mind.

So soon as she stood in the shaft of light that streamed out across the
road, she turned her head suddenly, and caught sight of a human figure
looming through the fog. The dim vision was enough for her. For one
moment she reeled beneath an overpowering weight of dread, for she could
not doubt any longer that the man had followed her the whole way from
her own door; then the desire to escape from the spy gave her strength.
Unable to think clearly, she walked twice as fast as before, as if it
were possible to escape from a man who of course could move much faster;
and for some minutes she fled on, till, reaching a pastry-cook's shop,
she entered and sank rather than sat down upon a chair by the counter.

A young woman busy with embroidery looked up from her work at
the rattling of the door-latch, and looked out through the square
window-panes. She seemed to recognize the old-fashioned violet silk
mantle, for she went at once to a drawer as if in search of something
put aside for the newcomer. Not only did this movement and the
expression of the woman's face show a very evident desire to be rid as
soon as possible of an unwelcome visitor, but she even permitted herself
an impatient exclamation when the drawer proved to be empty. Without
looking at the lady, she hurried from her desk into the back shop and
called to her husband, who appeared at once.

"Wherever have you put?----" she began mysteriously, glancing at the
customer by way of finishing her question.

The pastry-cook could only see the old lady's head-dress, a huge black
silk bonnet with knots of violet ribbon round it, but he looked at his
wife as if to say, "Did you think I should leave such a thing as that
lying about in your drawer?" and then vanished.

The old lady kept so still and silent that the shopkeeper's wife was
surprised. She went back to her, and on a nearer view a sudden impulse
of pity, blended perhaps with curiosity, got the better of her. The
old lady's face was naturally pale; she looked as though she secretly
practised austerities; but it was easy to see that she was paler than
usual from recent agitation of some kind. Her head-dress was so arranged
as to almost hide hair that was white, no doubt with age, for there was
not a trace of powder on the collar of her dress. The extreme plainness
of her dress lent an air of austerity to her face, and her features were
proud and grave. The manners and habits of people of condition were so
different from those of other classes in former times that a noble was
easily known, and the shopkeeper's wife felt persuaded that her customer
was a _ci-devant_, and that she had been about the Court.

"Madame," she began with involuntary respect, forgetting that the title
was proscribed.

But the old lady made no answer. She was staring fixedly at the shop
windows as though some dreadful thing had taken shape against the panes.
The pastry-cook came back at that moment, and drew the lady from her
musings, by holding out a little cardboard box wrapped in blue paper.

"What is the matter, citoyenne?" he asked.

"Nothing, nothing, my friends," she answered, in a gentle voice. She
looked up at the man as she spoke, as if to thank him by a glance; but
she saw the red cap on his head, and a cry broke from her. "Ah! _You_
have betrayed me!"

The man and his young wife replied by an indignant gesture, that brought
the color to the old lady's face; perhaps she felt relief, perhaps she
blushed for her suspicions.

"Forgive me!" she said, with a childlike sweetness in her tones.
Then, drawing a gold louis from her pocket, she held it out to the
pastry-cook. "That is the price agreed upon," she added.

There is a kind of want that is felt instinctively by those who know
want. The man and his wife looked at one another, then at the elderly
woman before them, and read the same thoughts in each other's eyes. That
bit of gold was so plainly the last. Her hands shook a little as she
held it out, looking at it sadly but ungrudgingly, as one who knows the
full extent of the sacrifice. Hunger and penury had carved lines as easy
to read in her face as the traces of asceticism and fear. There
were vestiges of bygone splendor in her clothes. She was dressed in
threadbare silk, a neat but well-worn mantle, and daintily mended
lace,--in the rags of former grandeur, in short. The shopkeeper and his
wife, drawn two ways by pity and self-interest, began by lulling their
consciences with words.

"You seem very poorly, citoyenne----"

"Perhaps madame might like to take something," the wife broke in.

"We have some very nice broth," added the pastry-cook.

"And it is so cold," continued his wife; "perhaps you have caught a
chill, madame, on your way here. But you can rest and warm yourself a
bit."

"We are not so black as the devil!" cried the man.

The kindly intention in the words and tones of the charitable couple
won the old lady's confidence. She said that a strange man had been
following her, and she was afraid to go home alone.

"Is that all!" returned he of the red bonnet; "wait for me, citoyenne."

He handed the gold coin to his wife, and then went out to put on his
National Guard's uniform, impelled thereto by the idea of making some
adequate return for the money; an idea that sometimes slips into a
tradesman's head when he has been prodigiously overpaid for goods of no
great value. He took up his cap, buckled on his sabre, and came out in
full dress. But his wife had had time to reflect, and reflection, as not
unfrequently happens, closed the hand that kindly intentions had opened.
Feeling frightened and uneasy lest her husband might be drawn into
something unpleasant, she tried to catch at the skirt of his coat, to
hold him back, but he, good soul, obeying his charitable first thought,
brought out his offer to see the lady home, before his wife could stop
him.

"The man of whom the citoyenne is afraid is still prowling about the
shop, it seems," she said sharply.

"I am afraid so," said the lady innocently.

"How if it is a spy?... a plot?... Don't go. And take the box away from
her----"

The words whispered in the pastry-cook's ear cooled his hot fit of
courage down to zero.

"Oh! I will just go out and say a word or two. I will rid you of him
soon enough," he exclaimed, as he bounced out of the shop.

The old lady meanwhile, passive as a child and almost dazed, sat down
on her chair again. But the honest pastry-cook came back directly.
A countenance red enough to begin with, and further flushed by the
bake-house fire, was suddenly blanched; such terror perturbed him that
he reeled as he walked, and stared about him like a drunken man.

"Miserable aristocrat! Do you want to have our heads cut off?" he
shouted furiously. "You just take to your heels and never show yourself
here again. Don't come to me for materials for your plots."

He tried, as he spoke, to take away the little box which she had slipped
into one of her pockets. But at the touch of a profane hand on her
clothes, the stranger recovered youth and activity for a moment,
preferring to face the dangers of the street with no protector save God,
to the loss of the thing she had just paid for. She sprang to the door,
flung it open, and disappeared, leaving the husband and wife dumfounded
and quaking with fright.

Once outside in the street, she started away at a quick walk; but her
strength soon failed her. She heard the sound of the snow crunching
under a heavy step, and knew that the pitiless spy was on her track. She
was obliged to stop. He stopped likewise. From sheer terror, or lack
of intelligence, she did not dare to speak or to look at him. She went
slowly on; the man slackened his pace and fell behind so that he could
still keep her in sight. He might have been her very shadow.

Nine o'clock struck as the silent man and woman passed again by the
Church of Saint Laurent. It is in the nature of things that calm must
succeed to violent agitation, even in the weakest soul; for if feeling
is infinite, our capacity to feel is limited. So, as the stranger lady
met with no harm from her supposed persecutor, she tried to look upon
him as an unknown friend anxious to protect her. She thought of all the
circumstances in which the stranger had appeared, and put them together,
as if to find some ground for this comforting theory, and felt inclined
to credit him with good intentions rather than bad.

Forgetting the fright that he had given the pastry-cook, she walked on
with a firmer step through the upper end of the Faubourg Saint Martin;
and another half-hour's walk brought her to a house at the corner where
the road to the Barriere de Pantin turns off from the main thoroughfare.
Even at this day, the place is one of the least frequented parts of
Paris. The north wind sweeps over the Buttes-Chaumont and Belleville,
and whistles through the houses (the Hovels rather), scattered over an
almost uninhabited low-lying waste, Where the fences are heaps of earth
and bones. It was a desolate-looking place, a fitting refuge for despair
and misery.

The sight of it appeared to make an impression upon the relentless
pursuer of a poor creature so daring as to walk alone at night through
the silent streets. He stood in thought, and seemed by his attitude to
hesitate. She could see him dimly now, under the street lamp that sent a
faint, flickering light through the fog. Fear gave her eyes. She saw, or
thought she saw, something sinister about the stranger's features. Her
old terrors awoke; she took advantage of a kind of hesitation on his
part, slipped through the shadows to the door of the solitary house,
pressed a spring, and vanished swiftly as a phantom.

For awhile the stranger stood motionless, gazing up at the house. It
was in some sort a type of the wretched dwellings in the suburb; a
tumble-down hovel, built of rough stones, daubed over with a coat of
yellowish stucco, and so riven with great cracks that there seemed to
be danger lest the slightest puff of wind might blow it down. The roof,
covered with brown moss-grown tiles, had given way in several places,
and looked as though it might break down altogether under the weight of
the snow. The frames of the three windows on each story were rotten with
damp and warped by the sun; evidently the cold must find its way inside.
The house standing thus quite by itself looked like some old tower
that Time had forgotten to destroy. A faint light shone from the attic
windows pierced at irregular distances in the roof; otherwise the whole
building was in total darkness.

Meanwhile the old lady climbed not without difficulty up the rough,
clumsily built staircase, with a rope by way of a hand-rail. At the door
of the lodging in the attic she stopped and tapped mysteriously; an old
man brought forward a chair for her. She dropped into it at once.

"Hide! hide!" she exclaimed, looking up at him. "Seldom as we leave the
house, everything that we do is known, and every step is watched----"

"What is it now?" asked another elderly woman, sitting by the fire.

"The man that has been prowling about the house yesterday and to-day,
followed me to-night----"

At those words all three dwellers in the wretched den looked in each
other's faces and did not try to dissimulate the profound dread that
they felt. The old priest was the least overcome, probably because
he ran the greatest danger. If a brave man is weighed down by great
calamities or the yoke of persecution, he begins, as it were, by making
the sacrifice of himself; and thereafter every day of his life becomes
one more victory snatched from fate. But from the way in which the women
looked at him it was easy to see that their intense anxiety was on his
account.

"Why should our faith in God fail us, my sisters?" he said, in low but
fervent tones. "We sang His praises through the shrieks of murderers and
their victims at the Carmelites. If it was His will that I should come
alive out of that butchery, it was, no doubt, because I was reserved for
some fate which I am bound to endure without murmuring. God will protect
His own; He can do with them according to His will. It is for you, not
for me that we must think."

"No," answered one of the women. "What is our life compared to a
priest's life?"

"Once outside the Abbaye de Chelles, I look upon myself as dead," added
the nun who had not left the house, while the Sister that had just
returned held out the little box to the priest.

"Here are the wafers... but I can hear some one coming up the stairs."

At this, the three began to listen. The sound ceased.

"Do not be alarmed if somebody tries to come in," said the priest.
"Somebody on whom we could depend was to make all necessary arrangements
for crossing the frontier. He is to come for the letters that I have
written to the Duc de Langeais and the Marquis de Beauseant, asking them
to find some way of taking you out of this dreadful country, and away
from the death or the misery that waits for you here."

"But are you not going to follow us?" the nuns cried under their breath,
almost despairingly.

"My post is here where the sufferers are," the priest said simply,
and the women said no more, but looked at their guest in reverent
admiration. He turned to the nun with the wafers.

"Sister Marthe," he said, "the messenger will say _Fiat Voluntas_ in
answer to the word _Hosanna_."

"There is some one on the stairs!" cried the other nun, opening a
hiding-place contrived in the roof.

This time it was easy to hear, amid the deepest silence, a sound echoing
up the staircase; it was a man's tread on the steps covered with dried
lumps of mud. With some difficulty the priest slipped into a kind of
cupboard, and the nun flung some clothes over him.

"You can shut the door, Sister Agathe," he said in a muffled voice.

He was scarcely hidden before three raps sounded on the door. The holy
women looked into each other's eyes for counsel, and dared not say a
single word.

They seemed both to be about sixty years of age. They had lived out of
the world for forty years, and had grown so accustomed to the life of
the convent that they could scarcely imagine any other. To them, as to
plants kept in a hot-house, a change of air meant death. And so, when
the grating was broken down one morning, they knew with a shudder that
they were free. The effect produced by the Revolution upon their simple
souls is easy to imagine; it produced a temporary imbecility not natural
to them. They could not bring the ideas learned in the convent into
harmony with life and its difficulties; they could not even understand
their own position. They were like children whom mothers have always
cared for, deserted by their maternal providence. And as a child cries,
they betook themselves to prayer. Now, in the presence of imminent
danger, they were mute and passive, knowing no defence save Christian
resignation.

The man at the door, taking silence for consent, presented himself, and
the women shuddered. This was the prowler that had been making inquiries
about them for some time past. But they looked at him with frightened
curiosity, much as shy children stare silently at a stranger; and
neither of them moved.

The newcomer was a tall, burly man. Nothing in his behavior, bearing,
or expression suggested malignity as, following the example set by the
nuns, he stood motionless, while his eyes traveled round the room.

Two straw mats laid upon planks did duty as beds. On the one table,
placed in the middle of the room, stood a brass candlestick, several
plates, three knives, and a round loaf. A small fire burned in the
grate. A few bits of wood in a heap in a corner bore further witness
to the poverty of the recluses. You had only to look at the coating of
paint on the walls to discover the bad condition of the roof, and the
ceiling was a perfect network of brown stains made by rain-water. A
relic, saved no doubt from the wreck of the Abbaye de Chelles, stood
like an ornament on the chimney-piece. Three chairs, two boxes, and a
rickety chest of drawers completed the list of the furniture, but a door
beside the fireplace suggested an inner room beyond.

The brief inventory was soon made by the personage introduced into
their midst under such terrible auspices. It was with a compassionate
expression that he turned to the two women; he looked benevolently at
them, and seemed, at least, as much embarrassed as they. But the
strange silence did not last long, for presently the stranger began to
understand. He saw how inexperienced, how helpless (mentally speaking),
the two poor creatures were, and he tried to speak gently.

"I am far from coming as an enemy, citoyennes----" he began. Then he
suddenly broke off and went on, "Sisters, if anything should happen to
you, believe me, I shall have no share in it. I have come to ask a favor
of you."

Still the women were silent.

"If I am annoying you--if--if I am intruding, speak freely, and I will
go; but you must understand that I am entirely at your service; that if
I can do anything for you, you need not fear to make use of me. I, and I
only, perhaps, am above the law, since there is no King now."

There was such a ring of sincerity in the words that Sister Agathe
hastily pointed to a chair as if to bid their guest be seated. Sister
Agathe came of the house of Langeais; her manner seemed to indicate that
once she had been familiar with brilliant scenes, and had breathed the
air of courts. The stranger seemed half pleased, half distressed when
he understood her invitation; he waited to sit down until the women were
seated.

"You are giving shelter to a reverend father who refused to take the
oath, and escaped the massacres at the Carmelites by a miracle----"

"_Hosanna_!" Sister Agathe exclaimed eagerly, interrupting the stranger,
while she watched him with curious eyes.

"That is not the name, I think," he said.

"But, monsieur," Sister Marthe broke in quickly, "we have no priest
here, and----"

"In that case you should be more careful and on your guard," he answered
gently, stretching out his hand for a breviary that lay on the table. "I
do not think that you know Latin, and----"

He stopped; for, at the sight of the great emotion in the faces of
the two poor nuns, he was afraid that he had gone too far. They were
trembling, and the tears stood in their eyes.

"Do not fear," he said frankly. "I know your names and the name of
your guest. Three days ago I heard of your distress and devotion to the
venerable Abbe de----"

"Hush!" Sister Agathe cried, in the simplicity of her heart, as she laid
her finger on her lips.

"You see, Sisters, that if I had conceived the horrible idea of
betraying you, I could have given you up already, more than once----"

At the words the priest came out of his hiding-place and stood in their
midst.

"I cannot believe, monsieur, that you can be one of our persecutors," he
said, addressing the stranger, "and I trust you. What do you want with
me?"

The priest's holy confidence, the nobleness expressed in every line in
his face, would have disarmed a murderer. For a moment the mysterious
stranger, who had brought an element of excitement into lives of misery
and resignation, gazed at the little group; then he turned to the priest
and said, as if making a confidence, "Father, I came to beg you to
celebrate a mass for the repose of the soul of--of--of an august
personage whose body will never rest in consecrated earth----"

Involuntarily the abbe shivered. As yet, neither of the Sisters
understood of whom the stranger was speaking; they sat with their heads
stretched out and faces turned towards the speaker, curiosity in their
whole attitude. The priest meanwhile, was scrutinizing the stranger;
there was no mistaking the anxiety in the man's face, the ardent
entreaty in his eyes.

"Very well," returned the abbe. "Come back at midnight. I shall be ready
to celebrate the only funeral service that it is in our power to offer
in expiation of the crime of which you speak."

A quiver ran through the stranger, but a sweet yet sober satisfaction
seemed to prevail over a hidden anguish. He took his leave respectfully,
and the three generous souls felt his unspoken gratitude.

Two hours later, he came back and tapped at the garret door.
Mademoiselle de Beauseant showed the way into the second room of their
humble lodging. Everything had been made ready. The Sisters had moved
the old chest of drawers between the two chimneys, and covered its
quaint outlines over with a splendid altar cloth of green watered silk.

The bare walls looked all the barer, because the one thing that hung
there was the great ivory and ebony crucifix, which of necessity
attracted the eyes. Four slender little altar candles, which the Sisters
had contrived to fasten into their places with sealing-wax, gave a
faint, pale light, almost absorbed by the walls; the rest of the room
lay well-nigh in the dark. But the dim brightness, concentrated upon
the holy things, looked like a ray from Heaven shining down upon the
unadorned shrine. The floor was reeking with damp. An icy wind swept in
through the chinks here and there, in a roof that rose sharply on either
side, after the fashion of attic roofs. Nothing could be less imposing;
yet perhaps, too, nothing could be more solemn than this mournful
ceremony. A silence so deep that they could have heard the faintest
sound of a voice on the Route d'Allemagne, invested the night-piece with
a kind of sombre majesty; while the grandeur of the service--all the
grander for the strong contrast with the poor surroundings--produced a
feeling of reverent awe.

The Sisters kneeling on each side of the altar, regardless of the
deadly chill from the wet brick floor, were engaged in prayer, while the
priest, arrayed in pontifical vestments, brought out a golden chalice
set with gems; doubtless one of the sacred vessels saved from the
pillage of the Abbaye de Chelles. Beside a ciborium, the gift of royal
munificence, the wine and water for the holy sacrifice of the mass stood
ready in two glasses such as could scarcely be found in the meanest
tavern. For want of a missal, the priest had laid his breviary on the
altar, and a common earthenware plate was set for the washing of hands
that were pure and undefiled with blood. It was all so infinitely great,
yet so little, poverty-stricken yet noble, a mingling of sacred and
profane.

The stranger came forward reverently to kneel between the two nuns. But
the priest had tied crape round the chalice of the crucifix, having no
other way of marking the mass as a funeral service; it was as if God
himself had been in mourning. The man suddenly noticed this, and the
sight appeared to call up some overwhelming memory, for great drops of
sweat stood out on his broad forehead.

Then the four silent actors in the scene looked mysteriously at one
another; and their souls in emulation seemed to stir and communicate the
thoughts within them until all were melted into one feeling of awe and
pity. It seemed to them that the royal martyr whose remains had been
consumed with quicklime, had been called up by their yearning and now
stood, a shadow in their midst, in all the majesty of a king. They
were celebrating an anniversary service for the dead whose body lay
elsewhere. Under the disjointed laths and tiles, four Christians were
holding a funeral service without a coffin, and putting up prayers to
God for the soul of a King of France. No devotion could be purer than
this. It was a wonderful act of faith achieved without an afterthought.
Surely in the sight of God it was like the cup of cold water which
counterbalances the loftiest virtues. The prayers put up by two feeble
nuns and a priest represented the whole Monarchy, and possibly at the
same time, the Revolution found expression in the stranger, for the
remorse in his face was so great that it was impossible not to think
that he was fulfilling the vows of a boundless repentance.

When the priest came to the Latin words, _Introibo ad altare Dei_,
a sudden divine inspiration flashed upon him; he looked at the three
kneeling figures, the representatives of Christian France, and said
instead, as though to blot out the poverty of the garret, "We are about
to enter the Sanctuary of God!"

These words, uttered with thrilling earnestness, struck reverent awe
into the nuns and the stranger. Under the vaulted roof of St. Peter's at
Rome, God would not have revealed Himself in greater majesty than here
for the eyes of the Christians in that poor refuge; so true is it that
all intermediaries between God and the soul of man are superfluous, and
all the grandeur of God proceeds from Himself alone.

The stranger's fervor was sincere. One emotion blended the prayers of
the four servants of God and the King in a single supplication. The holy
words rang like the music of heaven through the silence. At one moment,
tears gathered in the stranger's eyes. This was during the _Pater
Noster_; for the priest added a petition in Latin, and his audience
doubtless understood him when he said: "_Et remitte scelus regicidis
sicut Ludovicus eis remisit semetipse_"--forgive the regicides as Louis
himself forgave them.

The Sisters saw two great tears trace a channel down the stranger's
manly checks and fall to the floor. Then the office for the dead was
recited; the Domine salvum fac regem chanted in an undertone that
went to the hearts of the faithful Royalists, for they thought how the
child-King for whom they were praying was even then a captive in the
hands of his enemies; and a shudder ran through the stranger, as he
thought that a new crime might be committed, and that he could not
choose but take his part in it.

The service came to an end. The priest made a sign to the sisters, and
they withdrew. As soon as he was left alone with the stranger, he went
towards him with a grave, gentle face, and said in fatherly tones:

"My son, if your hands are stained with the blood of the royal martyr,
confide in me. There is no sin that may not be blotted out in the sight
of God by penitence as sincere and touching as yours appears to be."

At the first words the man started with terror, in spite of himself.
Then he recovered composure, and looked quietly at the astonished
priest.

"Father," he said, and the other could not miss the tremor in his voice,
"no one is more guiltless than I of the blood shed----"

"I am bound to believe you," said the priest. He paused a moment, and
again he scrutinized his penitent. But, persisting in the idea that
the man before him was one of the members of the Convention, one of the
voters who betrayed an inviolable and anointed head to save their own,
he began again gravely:

"Remember, my son, that it is not enough to have taken no active part in
the great crime; that fact does not absolve you. The men who might have
defended the King and left their swords in their scabbards, will have a
very heavy account to render to the King of Heaven--Ah! yes," he added,
with an eloquent shake of the head, "heavy indeed!--for by doing nothing
they became accomplices in the awful wickedness----"

"But do you think that an indirect participation will be punished?" the
stranger asked with a bewildered look. "There is the private soldier
commanded to fall into line--is he actually responsible?"

The priest hesitated. The stranger was glad; he had put the Royalist
precisian in a dilemma, between the dogma of passive obedience on the
one hand (for the upholders of the Monarchy maintained that obedience
was the first principle of military law), and the equally important
dogma which turns respect for the person of a King into a matter of
religion. In the priest's indecision he was eager to see a favorable
solution of the doubts which seemed to torment him. To prevent too
prolonged reflection on the part of the reverend Jansenist, he added:

"I should blush to offer remuneration of any kind for the funeral
service which you have just performed for the repose of the King's soul
and the relief of my conscience. The only possible return for something
of inestimable value is an offering likewise beyond price. Will you
deign, monsieur, to take my gift of a holy relic? A day will perhaps
come when you will understand its value."

As he spoke the stranger held out a box; it was very small and
exceedingly light. The priest took it mechanically, as it were, so
astonished was he by the man's solemn words, the tones of his voice, and
the reverence with which he held out the gift.

The two men went back together into the first room. The Sisters were
waiting for them.

"This house that you are living in belongs to Mucius Scaevola, the
plasterer on the first floor," he said. "He is well known in the Section
for his patriotism, but in reality he is an adherent of the Bourbons.
He used to be a huntsman in the service of his Highness the Prince de
Conti, and he owes everything to him. So long as you stay in the house,
you are safer here than anywhere else in France. Do not go out. Pious
souls will minister to your necessities, and you can wait in safety for
better times. Next year, on the 21st of January,"--he could not hide an
involuntary shudder as he spoke,--"next year, if you are still in this
dreary refuge, I will come back again to celebrate the expiatory mass
with you----"

He broke off, bowed to the three, who answered not a word, gave a last
look at the garret with its signs of poverty, and vanished.

Such an adventure possessed all the interest of a romance in the lives
of the innocent nuns. So, as soon as the venerable abbe told them the
story of the mysterious gift, it was placed upon the table, and by the
feeble light of the tallow dip an indescribable curiosity appeared in
the three anxious faces. Mademoiselle de Langeais opened the box, and
found a very fine lawn handkerchief, soiled with sweat; darker stains
appeared as they unfolded it.

"That is blood!" exclaimed the priest.

"It is marked with a royal crown!" cried Sister Agathe.

The women, aghast, allowed the precious relic to fall. For their simple
souls the mystery that hung about the stranger grew inexplicable; as for
the priest, from that day forth he did not even try to understand it.



Before very long the prisoners knew that, in spite of the Terror,
some powerful hand was extended over them. It began when they received
firewood and provisions; and next the Sisters knew that a woman had lent
counsel to their protector, for linen was sent to them, and clothes
in which they could leave the house without causing remark upon the
aristocrat's dress that they had been forced to wear. After awhile
Mucius Scaevola gave them two civic cards; and often tidings necessary
for the priest's safety came to them in roundabout ways. Warnings and
advice reached them so opportunely that they could only have been sent
by some person in the possession of state secrets. And, at a time when
famine threatened Paris, invisible hands brought rations of "white
bread" for the proscribed women in the wretched garret. Still they
fancied that Citizen Mucius Scaevola was only the mysterious instrument
of a kindness always ingenious, and no less intelligent.

The noble ladies in the garret could no longer doubt that their
protector was the stranger of the expiatory mass on the night of the
22nd of January, 1793; and a kind of cult of him sprung up among them.
Their one hope was in him; they lived through him. They added special
petitions for him to their prayers; night and morning the pious souls
prayed for his happiness, his prosperity, his safety; entreating God to
remove all snares far from his path, to deliver him from his enemies,
to grant him a long and peaceful life. And with this daily renewed
gratitude, as it may be called, there blended a feeling of curiosity
which grew more lively day by day. They talked over the circumstances
of his first sudden appearance, their conjectures were endless; the
stranger had conferred one more benefit upon them by diverting their
minds. Again, and again, they said, when he next came to see them as he
promised, to celebrate the sad anniversary of the death of Louis XVI.,
he could not escape their friendship.

The night so impatiently awaited came at last. At midnight the old
wooden staircase echoed with the stranger's heavy footsteps. They had
made the best of their room for his coming; the altar was ready, and
this time the door stood open, and the two Sisters were out at the
stairhead, eager to light the way. Mademoiselle de Langeais even came
down a few steps, to meet their benefactor the sooner.

"Come," she said, with a quaver in the affectionate tones, "come in; we
are expecting you."

He raised his face, gave her a dark look, and made no answer. The sister
felt as if an icy mantle had fallen over her, and said no more. At the
sight of him, the glow of gratitude and curiosity died away in their
hearts. Perhaps he was not so cold, not so taciturn, not so stern as he
seemed to them, for in their highly wrought mood they were ready to pour
out their feeling of friendship. But the three poor prisoners understood
that he wished to be a stranger to them; and submitted. The priest
fancied that he saw a smile on the man's lips as he saw their
preparations for his visit, but it was at once repressed. He heard mass,
said his prayer, and then disappeared, declining, with a few polite
words, Mademoiselle de Langeais' invitation to partake of the little
collation made ready for him.

After the 9th Thermidor, the Sisters and the Abbe de Marolles could go
about Paris without the least danger. The first time that the abbe went
out he walked to a perfumer's shop at the sign of _The Queen of Roses_,
kept by the Citizen Ragon and his wife, court perfumers. The Ragons
had been faithful adherents of the Royalist cause; it was through their
means that the Vendean leaders kept up a correspondence with the Princes
and the Royalist Committee in Paris. The abbe, in the ordinary dress of
the time, was standing on the threshold of the shop--which stood between
Saint Roch and the Rue des Frondeurs--when he saw that the Rue Saint
Honore was filled with a crowd and he could not go out.

"What is the matter?" he asked Madame Ragon.

"Nothing," she said; "it is only the tumbril cart and the executioner
going to the Place Louis XV. Ah! we used to see it often enough last
year; but to-day, four days after the anniversary of the twenty-first of
January, one does not feel sorry to see the ghastly procession."

"Why not?" asked the abbe. "That is not said like a Christian."

"Eh! but it is the execution of Robespierre's accomplices. They defended
themselves as long as they could, but now it is their turn to go where
they sent so many innocent people."

The crowd poured by like a flood. The abbe, yielding to an impulse of
curiosity, looked up above the heads, and there in the tumbril stood the
man who had heard mass in the garret three days ago.

"Who is it?" he asked; "who is the man with----"

"That is the headsman," answered M. Ragon, calling the executioner--the
_executeur des hautes oeuvres_--by the name he had borne under the
Monarchy.

"Oh! my dear, my dear! M. l'Abbe is dying!" cried out old Madame Ragon.
She caught up a flask of vinegar, and tried to restore the old priest to
consciousness.

"He must have given me the handkerchief that the King used to wipe his
brow on the way to his martyrdom," murmured he. "... Poor man!... There
was a heart in the steel blade, when none was found in all France..."

The perfumers thought that the poor abbe was raving.

PARIS, January 183l.




ADDENDUM

The following personages appear in other stories of the Human Comedy.

     Beauseant, Marquis and Comte de
       Father Goriot

     Ragon, M. and Mme.
       Cesar Birotteau






End of Project Gutenberg's An Episode Under the Terror, by Honore de Balzac

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AN EPISODE UNDER THE TERROR ***

***** This file should be named 1456.txt or 1456.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/4/5/1456/

Produced by Dagny, and Bonnie Sala

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
