The Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch, Or The London Charivari, Volume 102,
March 12, 1892, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Punch, Or The London Charivari, Volume 102, March 12, 1892

Author: Various

Release Date: December 16, 2004 [EBook #14364]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH ***




Produced by Malcolm Farmer, William Flis, and the PG Online
Distributed Proofreading Team





PUNCH,

OR THE LONDON CHARIVARI.

VOL. 102.



March 12, 1892.




DOING THE OLD MASTERS.

(_A SKETCH AT BURLINGTON HOUSE_.)

IN GALLERY NO. I.

_The Usual Elderly Lady_ (_who judges every picture solely by
its subject_). "No. 9. Portrait of Mrs. BRYANSTON of Portman. By
GAINSBOROUGH." I don't like that at all. Such a _disagreeable_
expression! I can't think why they exhibit such things. I'm sure
there's no _pleasure_ in looking at them!

_Her Companion_ (_who finds no pleasure in looking at any of them_).
No, I must say I prefer the Academy to these old-fashioned things. I
suppose we can get a cup of _tea_ here, though?

_An Intelligent Person_. "Mrs. BRYANSTON of Portman." Sounds like a
made-up name rather, eh? Portman Square, and all that, y'know!

[Illustration: "My dear fellow, as if it was possible to mistake his
touch!"]

_His Friend_ (_with a touching confidence in the seriousness of the
authorities_). Oh, they wouldn't do that sort of thing _here_!

_A Too-impulsive Enthusiast_. Oh, JOHN, _look_ at that lovely tiger up
there! _Isn't_ the skin marvellously painted, and the eyes so natural
and all! It's a Landseer of _course_!

_John_. Catalogue says STUBBS.

_The Enth._ (_disenchanted_). STUBBS? I never heard of him. But it's
really rather well done.

_The Man who is a bit of a Connoisseur in his way_ (_arriving at a
portrait of Mrs. BILLINGTON_). Not a bad Romney, that.

_His Friend_ (_with Catalogue_). What makes you think it's a Romney?

_The Conn._ My dear fellow, as if it was possible to mistake his
touch. (_Thinks from his friend's expression, that he had better
hedge._) Unless it's a Reynolds. Of course it _might_ be a Sir Joshua,
their manner at one period was very much alike--yes, it might be a
Reynolds, certainly.

_His Friend_. It might be a Holbein--if it didn't happen to be a
Gainsborough.

_The Conn._ (_effecting a masterly retreat_). Didn't I _say_
Gainsborough? Of course that was what I _meant_. Nothing like
Reynolds--nor Romney either. Totally different thing!

IN GALLERY NO. II.

_Mr. Ernest Stodgely_ (_before JAN STEEN's "Christening"_). Now look
at this, FLOSSIE; very curious, very interesting. Gives you such an
insight into the times. This man, you see, is wearing a hat of the
period. Remarkable, isn't it?

_Miss Featherhead_. Not so remarkable as if he was wearing a hat of
some _other_ period, ERNEST, is it?

_The Elderly Lady_ (_before a View of Amsterdam, by Van der Heyden_).
Now, you really _must_ look at this, my dear--isn't it wonderful? Why,
you can count every single brick in the walls, and the tiny little
figures with their features all complete; you want a magnifying-glass
to _see_ it all! How conscientious painters were in those days!
And _what_ a difference from those "Impressionists," as they call
themselves.

_Her Comp._ (_apathetically_). Yes, indeed; I wonder whether it would
be better to get our tea here, or wait till we get outside?

_The Eld. L._ Oh, it's too early yet. Look at that poor hunted stag
jumping over a dining-room table, and upsetting the glasses and
things. I suppose that's LANDSEER--no, I see it's some one of the name
of SNYDERS. I expect he got the _idea_ from LANDSEER, though, don't
you?

_Her Comp._ Very likely indeed, dear; but (_pursuing her original
train of thought_) you get rather nice tea at some of these aerated
bread-shops; so perhaps if we waited--(_&c., &c._)

IN GALLERY NO. III.

_Two Pretty Nieces with an Elderly Uncle_ (_coming to "Apollo and
Marsyas," by Tintoretto_). What was the _story_ of Apollo and Marsyas,
Uncle?

_The Uncle_. Apollo? Oh, come, you've heard of _him_,
the--er--Sun-God, Phoebus-Apollo, and all that?

_His Nieces_. Oh, yes, we know all _that_; but who was Marsyas, and
what does the Catalogue mean by "Athena and three Umpires?"

_The Uncle_. Oh--er--hum! Didn't they teach you all that at school?
Well they _ought_ to have, that's all? Where's your Aunt--where's your
Aunt?

_Mr. Ernest Stodgely_ (_before the Portrait of the Marchesa Isabella
Grimaldi_). There, FLOSSIE, don't you feel the greatness of that now?
I'm curious to know how it impresses you!

_Miss Featherhead_. Well, I rather like her frock, ERNEST. How funny
to think aigrettes were worn so long ago, when they've just gone out
_again_, don't you know. It must have been difficult to kiss a person
across one of those enormous ruffs, though, don't you think?

IN GALLERY NO. IV.

_Mr. Schohorff_ (_loudly_). Ah, _that's_ a picture I know well; seen
it many a time in the Octagon Boudoir at dear old HATCHMENT's. But
it looks better lighted up. I remember the last time I was down there
they told me they'd been asked to lend it, but the Countess didn't
seem to think (_&c., &c._).

_Mrs. Frivell_ (_before "Death of Dido," by Liberale da Verona_). Why
is she standing on that pile of furniture in the courtyard, though?

_Mr. F._ Because AEneas had jilted her, and so she stabbed herself on a
funeral pyre after setting fire to it, you see.

_Mrs. F._ (_disapprovingly_). How _very_ odd. I thought they only did
that in India. But who are all those people looking-on?

_Mr. F._ Smart people of the period, my dear. Of course Dido would
send out invitations for a big function like that--Wind-up of the
season--Farewell Reception--sure to be a tremendous rush for cards.
Notice the evident enjoyment of the guests. They are depicted in the
act of remarking to one another that their hostess is doing all in
_her_ power to make the thing go off well. Keen observer of human
nature, old LIBERALE!

_Mrs. F._ Selfish creatures!

IN THE VESTIBULE.

_Mrs. Townley-Ratton_ (_about to leave with her husband, encounters
her cousins, the Miss RURAL-RATTONS, who have just arrived_). Why,
SOPHY, MARY! _how_ are you? this is _too_ delightful! When _did_ you
come up? How long are you going to be in town? _When_ can you come and
see me?

_Miss Sophy Rattan_ (_answering the two last questions_). Till the end
of the week. What will be the best time to find you?

_Mrs. T.R._ (_warmly_). Oh, _any_ time! I'm almost _always_ in--except
the afternoons, of course. I'm going out to tea or something every day
this week!

_Miss Sophy R._ Well, how would some time in the morning--

_Mrs. T.R._ The morning? No, I'm afraid--I'm _afraid_ it _mustn't_ be
the morning _this_ week--so many things that one _has_ to see to!

_Mr. T.R._ (_lazily_). You'd better all come and dine quietly some
evening.

    [_He yawns, to tone down any excess of hospitality in this
    invitation._

_Mrs. T.R._ (_quickly_). No, that would be _too_ cruel, when I know
they'll want to go to a theatre every night! And besides, I really
haven't a single free evening this week. But I must see if we can't
_arrange_ something. You really must drop me a line _next_ time
you're coming up! Good-bye, dears, we mustn't keep you from the
pictures--such a fine collection this winter! Love to your Mother,
and say I shall try to call--if I _possibly_ can!

_Mr. T.R._ (_as they descend the stairs_). I say, SELINA, you forgot
to ask 'em where they are. Shall I run back and find out, eh?

_Mrs. T.R._ Not on _any_ account. They're probably at the Grand as
usual, and if they're not, it will be a very good excuse if I can't
call. You are such a _fusser_, ALFRED!

_Miss Sophy_ (_to_Miss MARY_). What a let-off! I wouldn't have minded
lunch so much--but _dinner_--no, thank you, my dear!

_Miss Mary_ (_gloomily_). She may call on Mother and ask us all yet.

_Miss Sophy_. She doesn't know where we are, and I took good care not
to tell her. It's getting too dark to see much, but we'll just walk
through the rooms, to say we've done it--shall we? [_They do._

       *       *       *       *       *

A SETTLER FOR MR. WOODS.--Mrs. RAM does not at all wonder at Amateurs
being able to "pick up old pieces of china at CHRISTY's," for she has
often heard that you've only got to go to King Street, where anyone
may see them "knocked down under a hammer."

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: "OFF HIS FEED."

_Salisbury the Vet._ "HUM! SEEMS TO HAVE WASTED A BIT! WANTS A
TONIC."]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: "THINGS ARE NOT WHAT THEY SEEM."

_Mr. Foozler_ (_who, while waiting for the last Train, has wandered
to the end of the Platform, opened the door of the Signal-box, and
watched the Signalman's manipulations of the levers for some moments
with hazy perplexity, suddenly_). "ARF O' BURT'N 'N BIRRER F' ME,
GUV'NOR!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

"OFF HIS FEED!"

    SCENE--_The St. Stephen's Stables. Stall of the Favourite,
    "Majority," who is being inspected by the great "Vet."
    (S-L-SB-RY) in presence of the Groom (B-LF-R), and the
    Stable-help (CH-PL-N)._

_Stable-help_ (_anxiously_). Why, he used to be a stunner, and a
          safe and steady runner,
    And we trusted him, most confident, for landing us the Stakes
   Now, what can the cause of _this_ be? He's a-looking queer and
          quisby;
    And his off fore leg seems shaky, and the rest ain't no _great_
          shakes.

_Groom_ (_sharply_). Not too much of it, you HARRY! You are here
          to fetch and carry,
    And not to pass opinions in the presence of the Vet.
   But he _does_ look dicky, Mister; I've tried bolus, I've tried
          blister,
    But I haven't got him up to his old form by chalks, Sir, _yet_!

_Vet._ (_dubiously_). You're a bit new at the "biz.," lad, and I
          tell you what it is, lad,--
     These thoroughbreds aren't managed like a dray-horse, don'tcher
          know.
  They want very careful feeding, and Sangrado purge or bleeding
     Won't suit our modern strain--of man _or_ horse. Steady, lad!
          Woa! [_Examines him._

_Groom_ (_rather sulkily_). Well, Sir, what do you make it?

_Vet._                   Off his feed?

_Groom_.                            Well, he don't take it.
    Not voracious, so to speak, Sir, as he do when cherry ripe.

_Vet._ Ah-h-h! May want a change of diet. Eye is neither bright
          _nor_ quiet,
    And his coat seems dull and roughish, though he's sound in pulse
          and pipe.

_Stable-help_. Don't take kindly to his fodder, and, what _I_
          thinks even odder,
    With a temper like a hangel, gits a bit inclined to kick.
  Landed _'Art Dyke_ a fair wunner!

_Groom_ (_testily_).        Well, you are an eighty-tonner
    At superfluous patter, HARRY!

_Stable-help_ (_aside_).    Lor! _His_ temper's gitting quick!
  What has been and popped the acid in his style so prim and placid?
    Doesn't shine like what he thought to as head-groom. Yus,
          there's the rub!

_Vet._ (_looking at sieve_). Seem to shy _that_ feed!

_Groom_.                  I mixed it with the greatest care, and
          fixed it
    With an eye to tempt his appetite, but there, he's off his grub!

_Vet._ (_to Stable-help_). Takes your green stuff better?

_Stable-help_.           True, Sir!

_Groom_.                            But too much o' that won't do,
          Sir.
     Can't live on tares entirely! (_Aside._) This here boy's too
          full of beans.

_Vet._ Ah! I see the whole position. He's a bit out of condition,
    Wants a tonic and skilled treatment. Yes, no doubt that's what
          it means.
  With an appetite that's picksome comes a temper tart and tric
     But a pick-me-up--I'll send one--will, I'm sure set all that
          square.
  And if there's further wasting, then, without too headlong hasting,
    Give him, as soon as possible--a little _Country Air_!

       *       *       *       *       *

LORD WILDERMERE'S MOTHER-IN-LAW.

  She's as bad as can be, but she's "Precious" to me,
    Though her conduct cannot be called free from a flaw;
  For in spite of blackmail, I have vowed ne'er to fail
    In the duty I owe to my Mother-in-law.

  There have been flippant sneers and conventional jeers,
    At a worthy relation that I hold in awe;
  Though it angers my wife, all the joy of my life
    Comes from drawing big cheques--for my Mother-in-law.

  Peccadilloes she had, but she isn't all bad,
    And the folks who have sneered shall their libels withdraw;
  To our dance she shall come, and the world be struck dumb
    At the way that I've whitewashed my Mother-in-law.

  She shall rise from the slime of what people called crime,
    To a virtuous height, for I always foresaw
  'Twould be wise to proclaim to all ages the fame
    Of that much-maligned female--a Mother-in-law.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: WHAT OUR ARTIST (THE CHEEKY ONE) HAS TO PUT UP WITH.

"LOOK HERE, MY PRINCE OF PICTURE-DEALERS--A GREAT FRIEND OF MINE, THE
COUNTESS OF WATERBRUSH, IS GOING TO HAVE AN ART STALL AT THE LITTLE
PEDDLINGTON BAZAAR. COULD YOU SPARE HER LADYSHIP ANY OLD RUBBISH YOU
CAN'T GET RID OF? IT'S FOR A CHARITY, YOU KNOW." -- "ACH! ZOH! VELL,
MY YOONG VRENT, I HAFE ZUM TOZENS OF YOUR VATER-CULLERS ZAT PERHAPS
HER LATYSHIP _MIGHT_ MANAGE TO KET RIT OF--FOR A _CHARITY_, YOU KNOW!
SHE IS FERRY VELCOME, I ASSURE YOU!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

DEATH IN THE POP.

Rather alarmed by reading in paper about "explosive buttons." Seems
that combs, collars, cuffs, buttons and things made to imitate ivory
and tortoiseshell are really highly combustible. Lady in West of
England had her dress ignited by sudden explosion of a "fancy" button!
In consequence, advise my wife "to use that new hairbrush I gave her
very gingerly, or she'll be blown up." She wants to know "why I didn't
find that out before buying it." Difficult to find suitable reply.
Result--nobody blown up so far, except myself.

Combing my few remaining locks. No harm in comb, I suppose, as maker
assured me it was "only made of celluloid." Comb suddenly driven a
couple of inches into my head, with loud report! In bed for three
weeks. Write to maker, who says, "Didn't I know celluloid was mixture
of camphor and gun-cotton?" No, I didn't.

Playing billiards, when sufficiently recovered. Just executing
fiftieth spot-stroke in succession, when--an explosion! Cue driven out
of my hand, and half-way down marker's throat. Turns out that ball was
a mixture of Turkish Delight and nitroglycerine, and objected to my
hitting it. Marker brings action, and gets damages out of me.

Little later. New fancy waistcoat. Buttons like pearl. Rub one, to
give extra polish--Bang!--explosion. Where am I? In the middle of next
week, on which date I write this.

       *       *       *       *       *

CON. BY A WELSHER.--Why has Wales more Clerks than England?--Because
it has a _Penman more_.

       *       *       *       *       *

ENCOUNTER.

(_An Effort in the Spasmodic-Obscure, after the American Original
quoted by Mr. James Payn in "Our Note-Book."_)

  Two Spooks, swirled fast along the Vast,
    Meeting each other "at the double,"
  Collided, squirmed, then howled aghast,
    Each to the other, "What's _your_ trouble?"

  "Alas!" one whined, "Rymed Rot I read,
    Affected to admire, and quote it!"
  The other wailed, with shame-bowed head,
    "My case is even worse,--_I wrote it_!"

       *       *       *       *       *

THE SCALE WITH THE FALSE WEIGHTS.

(_A PAGE FROM THE NEWGATE CALENDAR--UP-TO-DATE EDITION._)

The two Convicts were tried at the same Assizes, put in the same dock
and sentenced by the same Judge. So a companionship sprang up between
them considering that one was by birth and education a Gentlemen, and
the other was not. And they went to the same prison, and listened
to the same words of the same Chaplain, and took their occasional
exercise in the same practising yard. And as luck would have it, they
served the same time, and were liberated at the same moment.

"I am afraid I must say good-bye, GILES," said ST. JAMES, as they
emerged into freedom from the portals of the gaol. "Good fellow as you
are, GILES, you do not belong to my set, and your presence would be
embarrassing."

"Oh, would it!" returned GILES, who had already recognised some of his
friends. "Well, I don't want to press my company on anyone."

"No offence!" exclaimed ST. JAMES, "I beg you--no offence! But we have
both to begin life again, and union is not strength in a case such as
ours!"

"Oh, no offence!" acquiesced GILES, as he accompanied some of his pals
to a neighbouring public-house.

ST. JAMES, left to his own devices, hurried to the Chambers that he
used to rent before he went to prison. They were "To Let." He rang the
bell, and the porter started back when he saw him.

"Hope you don't want to enter, Sir," said he; "but the Guv'nor gave
strict orders, as if you called, that you was not to go in. It ain't
my fault, Sir, but the Guv'nor is the Guv'nor!"

Disheartened by this rebuff, he tried the house of a friend, but
was so scornfully received, that he made up his mind never to visit
another acquaintance. Of course he found that his name had been
removed from his Clubs, and not a single individual would recognise
him. He was an outcast, and a ruined man. So he walked about the
streets until his shoes were in holes, and his last penny exhausted.
Then he lay down to sleep. But this was against the regulations, and
so he was hustled from pillar to post, until at last he found himself
in a very low part of town. He was trudging past a public-house,
when who should emerge from its cheerful-looking recesses but GILES.
"Hallo!" cried the young man, who seemed the picture of health, "are
_you_ down?"

"Yes--very," returned ST. JAMES. "I haven't a friend in the world, and
no one will have anything to say to me."

"What a shame!" cried the other. "Why, with me, I have had a rare old
time! Everybody has been pleased to see me."

"But hasn't your conviction injured you?"

"Not particularly. I have lots of people who support me. Why, if we
were _too_ particular with one another, we shouldn't have a pal in the
world! Hope there's nothing wrong."

"Why, don't you call this wrong? Here are you, as jolly as possible,
and I--a miserable man!"

"Can't be helped. We are in the same box."

"Are we?" said the semi-genteel Convict. "Well, I should have scarcely
believed it! Then, I suppose I must comfort myself with the thought
that the same law applies to the rich as the poor."

"Does it?" returned the commoner Convict. "Then all I can say is, that
whatever the law may be, the punishment is never the same." And ST.
JAMES, with a bitter sigh, wished he could change places with his more
fortunate dock-mate.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE CHEF'S NEW DISH FOR TRAVELLERS.--"_Insurance of Passengers'
Luggage_."--Bravo, THOMAS COOK AND SON! Not "too many Cooks," but
"just Cooks enough!" Hitherto the traveller had only to present
himself ready "dressed" to be thoroughly Cook'd, and done throughout,
to a turn. Now, in addition, his baggage can be book'd and Cook'd;
and, should any "_Gravy delictum_" happen to it, the value of the lost
portmanteau and boxes will be handed over to the aggrieved passenger.

       *       *       *       *       *

PATHETIC DESCRIPTION OF THE PRESENT STATE OF MR. GEORGE
ALEXANDER.--"He is running WILDE at the St. James's Theatre.--Yours,
L.W.F."

       *       *       *       *       *

CONFESSIONS OF A DUFFER.

VI.--THE DUFFER AT WHIST.

Whist, it seems to me, is an affair of eyes, memory, and calculative
ratiocination. As to eyes, I have a private theory that mine are
bewitched. It is not mere short sight. At school and college I have
seen Greek words on the printed page, and translated them correctly,
and come to grief, because these words, on inspection, were somehow
not there. Explain this I cannot, but it is a fact. The same with
Whist; I see spades where clubs are, and diamonds for hearts, and a
cold world accuses me of revoking and of carelessness, but it is _not
_ carelessness. It is something gone askew in phenomena. Thus, when
I am a witness as to facts in a trial, perjury is the softest word
for my testimony, so the Court thinks, because the Court is blessed
with the usual relations between objective facts, and subjective
impressions. I admit that I am less fortunate, but when I try to go
into this, I am interrupted. However, this is why I revoke.

[Illustration]

Then as to memory, I have none, for cards. It is extremely difficult,
indeed impossible, to recall who played what, after the cards are once
out of sight. I could tell you, like the man in the story, that such
and such a statement is on the ninety sixth page of the fifth volume
of GIBBON, the page on the left, half-way down; useless things of that
sort I remember: cards, not. As to calculation and inferences, I give
it up. I just first play out all my kings, then all my aces, I lead
trumps, if I have a bunch of them, and then it is my partner's turn
to make his little points. I return his lead when I happen to think
of it, which is not often. That is all _I_ have to confess, but I
have a friend, a brilliant player _I_ call him, and he permits me to
contribute his experiences, as mine are short and simple. To my mind,
Whist would not be a bad game, if the element of skill were excluded;
but give me Roulette. If foreign ladies would not snatch up my
winnings, I should be a master at Roulette, where genius is really
served, for I play on inspiration merely. But let me turn to the
confessions of my friend, my Mentor, I may call him, a man who is a
Member of the Burlington itself, one who has had losses, go to! Hear
him speak:--

"I have always sympathised," he says, "with _Mr. Pickwick_, in regard
to his experiences at Whist; that is to say, his experience on the
second occasion narrated in his history. The first time, it will be
remembered, all went well, when, owing to unfortunate lapses on the
part of 'the criminal Miller,' who omitted to 'trump the diamond'
and subsequently revoked, he and the fat gentleman were worsted in an
encounter with _Mr. Wardle's_ mother and the immortal hero.

"But at Bath there was a different tale to tell, the _Dowager Lady
Snuphanuph_ and _Mrs. Colonel Wugsby_, proved too able for him and
_Miss Bolo_, who when he played a wrong card, which, like me, he
probably did every other time, looked a small armoury of daggers,
and subsequently in a beautiful instance of the figure known to the
grammarian as Hendiadys, went home in tears and a Sedan chair."

Bearing in mind the advice attributed to TALLEYRAND, I have
conscientiously endeavoured to become a Whist-player; but it is
becoming increasingly obvious to me, that owing to the malison
pronounced at my birth, my room is generally preferred to my company.
And yet I have studied the subject according to my lights. Every
instance of Whist in fiction which comes under my notice receives my
undivided attention, and when I read Miss BROUGHTON, such a sentence
as, "I suppose," she said, "that it's the right thing to play out all
one's aces first? Her partner conscientiously endeavoured to veil the
expression of extreme dissent which this proposition called forth,
and with such success that the ace of hearts instantly and confidently
followed his brother."

When I read hints like these, I garner them up for my own future use.
I have pored over every known text-book on the subject, from MATTHEWS
and HOYLE to CAVENDISH. I once went so far as to learn the proper
leads by rote, forgetting them all within a week; and owing to my
inveterate habit of endeavouring to justify the most flagitious acts
by a supposed reference to authority, have earned for myself the name
of "Pole."

There are some with whom I play, who contrive to make me feel more at
my ease than do others, and even look upon me in virtue of my playing
with "those men at the Club" as one having authority; for among
the blind the one-eyed man is king. There is my Mother-in-law for
instance, now I really enjoy a rubber with _her_. We sit down after
dinner at a table scant of cloth, and either much too small or so
inconveniently large that I cannot see the trump at the other end of
it. She usually begins operations by misdealing, which is precisely
what always happens to me with a new pack; nor do I yet understand
how it is that the expert manages to deal at about sixty miles an hour
without a mistake, whereas when my turn comes every other card seems
to get stuck to its neighbour by a very superior kind of glue, so that
they all come out in batches of twos and threes as it were, instead of
one by one.

But when the deal has come right, her next step is to sort her cards,
which she does by placing all her trumps apart from the others between
her third and fourth fingers; I can thus tell how many she has, and am
further assisted by her generally dropping one or two in the process
face upwards on the table. This would be punishable at the Club; but
as she would consider it "mean" were any allusions made to it, nothing
happens. Towards the end of the hand her attention is apt to wander,
and owing to her abstraction play comes to a dead halt. When a hint
is offered that we are waiting for her, with prompt and business-like
alacrity but regardless of the rigorous formula, "Place your cards,
please," she will say, "Who led a spade?" there being at the time a
club, a heart, and a diamond on the table. Then, being the only one
who has a card of the leader's suit left, she revokes but is not found
out. When she leads out of turn, as happens on an average four or
five times every rubber, if I am against her, I call a suit from her
partner, upon which she says, flaring up, "Is _that_ the way you play
at the Club? 'Cheats never thrive.'" Nor do we, for the simple reason,
that she seldom holds less than three honours in each suit, and from
five to six trumps besides!

This, as I said, is the sort of Whist I rather enjoy; but when it
comes to playing in sober earnest at the Club, there is a different
tale to tell.

(_This different tale will be told in the Duffer's next._)

       *       *       *       *       *

"AIRY FAIRY LILLY UN!"--One day last week, MR. W.S. LILLY--i.e.
W. "SHIBBOLETHS" LILLY--delivered an excellent lecture on the
Papal-Italian question, and although at Birmingham, it was by no means
a brummagem discourse. But to quote the immortal ballad of _Billy
Taylor_, "When the Captain he come for to hear on't, He werry much
applauded what she'd done," and, to apply the lines to the present
instance, "When the POPE he comes for to hear on't," _will_ he "werry
much applaud," the opinions honestly and courteously enough expressed
in this lecture? By the way, "LEO and the Lilly" would make a fine
subject for a historical cartoon. The learned Lecturer took care to
observe, with all the true modesty of the humble flower from which
his name is derived, that he spoke only the opinion of a party, which
party, whether small, considerable, or large, his audience could judge
for themselves with the unclothed optic, as the party in question was,
not to put too fine a point on it, Himself.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: DANCING MEN.

"WHAT A CHARMING WALTZ THEY'RE PLAYING UPSTAIRS. (MORE CHAMPAGNE,
WAITER. THANKS!)"

"I'VE ONLY JUST COME--NOT BEEN UPSTAIRS YET. ONE HEARS THE MUSIC SO
MUCH BETTER DOWN HERE. (COLD CUTLET, PLEASE, AND SALAD. THANKS!)"]

       *       *       *       *       *

"A LITTLE HOLIDAY!"

    [It is proposed that 450,000 colliers belonging to the Miners'
    Federation should cease work for a week or a fortnight. This,
    it is said, is regarded as an "amicable" Strike, not against
    the Masters, but to raise the price of coal by producing an
    artificial scarcity, and thus avoiding a threatened reduction
    of wages consequent upon over-production. This the Miners
    call, "Going on Play."]

_Out-of-Worker to Out-on-Player_:--

  Who talks of "Solidarity of Labour,"--
    A favourite shibboleth in these our days?--
  To recognise one's duty to one's neighbour
    Is that which all--in theory--will praise.
  And Unions are upheld, and "Blacklegs" scouted--
    Friends of Fraternity _their_ heads must break
  To prove their loyal brotherhood undoubted!--
    But _here_ there seems to be some slight mistake.

  Going on Play, mate, you of the broad shoulders?
    Take holiday awhile from pick and lamp?
  Well your hard toil impresses all beholders,
    Sweating amidst black seams and choking "damp."
  A "holiday," for rest and recreation,
    None would begrudge you. But at the expense
  Of every other worker in the nation?
    I don't quite see it! Maybe I am dense.

  A "friendly" Strike, you call it; "amicable"!
    Nice sounding words! Strikes mostly mean hot war.
  But in to-day's wild Socialistic Babel
    Blest if I always know just where we are.
  But if I'm out of work, or out of fuel,
    Me and a many thousand like me, mate,
  Your "friendly" conflict seems a _leetle_ cruel
    To us, with idle hands or empty grate.

  I'd like to taste the sweets of "solidarity"
    In this connection; so would my pale friend;
  He's a poor Clerk. I fancy human charity,
    _All round_, a lot of bitter strife would end;
  And if _that_'s "solidarity," I'm for it;
    But in your "play" _are_ you considering _us_?
  No need for snivelling bunkum; I abhor it;
    But does fraternity shape itself _thus_?

  Must fight for your own hand? Oh, ah! precisely.
    Only that's ISHMAEL, after all, right out.
  Maybe that for yourself you're acting wisely,--
    Though even that seems open to some doubt,--
  But if your self-advancement means a smasher
    To mill-hand, poor mechanic, labourer, clerk,
  Without a fire to fry his slender "rasher,"
    Fraternity's outlook still looks rather dark.

  With Coal two bob a hundred, and still rising,
    Poor folk who buy it by the fourteen pound,
  (Dukes at St. James's Hall, this sounds surprising,
    But if you'd understand it, just look round!)
  Dockers and Brickies, charwomen and "childer,"
    With such small deer, mate, as my friend and me,
  Find one more "Social Question" to bewilder
    The small brains left us by chill poverty.

  Fighting _our_ battle? Humph! A rather roundabout
    Way of so doing! P'r'aps your Masters, too,
  Would claim the same--there _are_ such Bosses found about;
    Westminsters, Liveseys, Norwoods, and that crew,
  All for our good, not only Strike-Committees,
    But Rate-payers' Defence Leagues, and the like!
  Oh, the poor Propertied Classes! How one pities
    Those victims of the School Board, Council, Strike!

  If Miners and Mine-Owners pull together
    To raise the price of Coal--well, it may suit
  Both them and you. But, in this bitter weather,
    Your "Solidarity" brings _us_ bitter fruit.
  When our pinched fire dies down to its last ember,
    The picture of you "making holiday" thus
  Won't warm our wives and kids. Strike!--but remember
    That what is "Play" to you means death to us!

       *       *       *       *       *

A POSER FOR MR. WEATHERBY.--Mrs. RAM is not in the least astonished at
its being said that certain horses turn out "regular flyers," because,
she says, "she has often heard of mares' nests."

       *       *       *       *       *

"MINER PREMISES."--In the Coal Districts.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: "A LITTLE HOLIDAY!!"

  WORKING-MAN AND }  "AH! IT'S ALL VERY WELL,--BUT WHAT'S _PLAY_
  POOR CLERK.     }     TO _YOU_ IS _DEATH_ TO _US_."

       *       *       *       *       *

WHAT DO THEY MEAN BY IT?

In an interesting description (that appeared in the _Times_ for
Saturday, February 27) of the working of the "Jacquard Card-Preparing
Machine," which is, it appears, "a machine for superseding the human
brain, eye, and hand"--(so that soon all who can afford it will be
fitted up with these machines, and keep their brains, eyes, and hands
in reserve for very special occasions)--it was stated that "the blank
cards are automatically fed to the punches." That punches should be
spelt without the capital P is of course a Printer's error, deserving
capital punishment. _Mr. P._ thinks it right to state in answer to
numerous inquiries, that all his _Punches_ speak by the card. But
as to even the smallest of the _Punch_ family being "fed" on cards,
or getting his or her living by cards, the statement is utterly at
variance with the facts. _Mr. P._ is quite sure that the "Jacquard
Automatic Reading and Punching Syndicate" will at once retract
the injurious statement, or the youthful, vigorous and pugnacious
_Punches_ will be inquiring of _Mr. P._, as _Sam Weller_ did of _Mr.
Pickwick_ when that gentleman's great name was apparently taken in
vain, "Ain't nobody to be whopped for takin' this here liberty?" that
is, adapting the question to the present occasion, "Ain't nobody's
head to be Punch'd for this mis-use of an ancient and honourable
name?"

       *       *       *       *       *

THE NAIL-MAKERS' STRIKE.--They refuse to work unless higher wages are
paid "down on the nail."

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A "HUNTING FIXTURE."

HUNG UP ON A STILE, AND HOUNDS RUNNING LIKE MAD.]

       *       *       *       *       *

CRIES WITHOUT WOOL.

NO. II.--THE GROWL OF THE BEAR.

(_BY A SINGER IN_ "_AIR_.")

    ["In consequence of the rumour that,... American stocks
    declined heavily.... The rumour proved totally without
    foundation."--_Any Money-article; any day._]

[Illustration]

  There is little that goads us with fiercer despair
  (Those who buy, you perpend, stock, debenture or share,
  Such as speculate mainly; investors are rare--)
  Than this growl ill-conditioned of pestilent Bear!

  With a craftiness planned and a malice unfair,
  Improvising a scare unsubstantial as air--
  Now it's "war," now "disease," and the world must prepare
  For the death of, say, GOULD, or a Chilian flare;

  Or the "cutting of rates:" I am quite unaware
  What it means, I declare, but it's "cutting," I swear,
  To a person like me, not a flush millionaire
  Who must "realise" scrip,--and the canker of care.

  It would seem, we could e'er so conveniently spare
  From a world too competitive, blarneyed with blare,
  Both the Yankee of Wall-Street, his London _confrere_,
  And all criers of "Lost!" when no losses are there;

  All the wreckers, whose lair is secure past compare,
  All who batten on bones with a maw debonair,
  And the carcase of Poverty torture and tear
  With historical fraud, and benevolent glare.

  Who will join me in sport that is novel--who'll dare
  In his prosperous pit to go baiting the "Bear,"
  Who will lead him a dance, who his talons will pare,
  And make summary work of this ursine affair?

       *       *       *       *       *

"MUST IT COME TO THIS?"

    SCENE--_The War Office. Present Mr. STANHOPE; to him enter
    Inspector-General PUNCH.

_Mr. Stanhope_. Ah, Sir, glad to see you. Can I do anything for you?

_Inspector-General_. Well, not for me--but you may and must do
something for those I represent--the Volunteer Officers.

_Mr. Stan._ Oh, you have come about them, have you? Well, you saw what
I said about them in my Memorandum the other day?

_In.-Gen._ I noticed what you did _not_ say--you hoped during the
present year to see some practical proposals.

_Mr. Stan._ Well, what do you want more?

_In.-Gen._ The proposals themselves.

_Mr. Stan._ They will come in good time.

_In.-Gen._ No time in this matter will be good--except the present.

_Mr. Stan._ Oh, you leave it to me, you will see it will be all right.

_In.-Gen._ No--unless you attend to the matter at once--now--at this
moment.

_Mr. Stan._ How you do take me up! What a hurry you are in!

_In.-Gen._ Shilly-shallying to the rear--action to the front. Now,
then, produce your proposals.

_Mr. Stan._ (_reluctantly producing a paper from a pigeon-hole_).
Well, here they are--(_giving them_)--what do you think of them?

_In.-Gen._ (_after a hurried perusal_). Humph! At any rate let them
he published at once, that those interested may be able to come to
an immediate decision as to their utility. Do you hear, Sir? Adieu!
[_Exit._

    (_And if the SECRETARY of STATE for WAR is a wise man, he
    will act upon the hint thus offered him._)

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: GRAND OLD ENERGY.

[It is stated that Mr. GLADSTONE feels very much the want of exercise
since his return to Parliamentary duties.]]

       *       *       *       *       *

DREAMS.

    [Mr. JOHN MORLEY having said that he would be sorry for the
    country whose young men ceased to dream dreams, Lord RANDOLPH
    CHURCHILL twitted him with having described the Progressive
    party as young men who dream dreams, and added, "They are
    words which I will never let die."]

  Dreams, my dear Lord? Well, there are dreams _and_ dreams,
  Are those of BURNS much worse than those of WEMYSS?
  Are WESTMINSTER's vain visions, though mature
  The dreamer, less absurd or more obscure
  Than those of some "young man" who dares to hope
  That he with crowded London's ills can cope?
  "Behold this dreamer cometh!" So of old
  The sons of JACOB, envious, scornful, cold,
  And fearful for their privilege of birth
  And of possession, in derisive mirth,
  Cried at young JOSEPH's coming. A "young man,"
  O reverend oracle! Yet his wit outran,
  His wisdom far outsoared, for all their boast,
  The _nous_ collective of the elder host;
  And PHARAOH, when his "wise men" vainly schemed,
  Found statesmanship in a young man who dreamed.
  You will not let them die? Well, as you list!
  The words, Sir, with a Machiavellian twist,
  Tickle the ears of those smart word-fence blinds,
  And garbled catch-words win unwary minds,
  And, maybe, witless votes. Poor London dreams
  Of--many things most horrible to WEMYSS!
  The nightmare-incubus of old abuse
  Propertied privilege, expense profuse
  Of many lives for one, the dead-hand's grip
  On the slow generations, the sharp whip
  Of a compulsory poverty, the gloom
  Of that high-rated den, miscalled a Home!
  All these it knows, and many miseries more,
  And dreams of--Betterment! You'll "never let die.
  JOHN MORLEY's words?" You cannot, though you try.
  In vain 'gainst dreaming youth you feign to scream,
  Because you're yet a Young Man--and you Dream!

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: VERY LITERAL.

_The Major_. "NO DOUBT YOU'RE VERY FOND OF ANTIQUES, MISS EUGENIA?"

_Miss Eugenia_. "OH YES, INDEED!--AND I'M DEVOTED TO GRANDMAMMA!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

ESSENCE OF PARLIAMENT.

EXTRACTED FROM THE DIARY OF TOBY, M.P.

[Illustration: Lord Elcho.]

_House of Commons, Monday, February 29._--Mr. G. looked in to-night
from the Riviera; greeted with rousing cheer from Opposition; didn't
expect to see him to-day; just arrived from Mediterranean _via_ Paris;
most men in such circumstances would have gone straight home, read
their letters, had quiet dinner, "and so to bed," as the late Mr.
PEPYS occasionally remarked.

"That's all very well for you elderly fellows, TOBY," said Mr.
G., beaming with health and smiles. "ARMITSTEAD, for example, went
straight off home. I was careful to see about that; he's a fine
fellow, and I humoured him by letting him suppose he was looking after
me as far as Biarritz, and on to Pau. In no other way could I have
got him to make a holiday. Think I rather wore him out at St. Raphael.
When a man gets over sixty he doesn't care about his ten or fifteen
mile walk before luncheon. However, I brought ARMITSTEAD back all
right, and, packing him off home at Charing Cross, just popped in here
to see how you are getting on."

In respect of business, not getting on at all. Things going awry.
Ministerialists won't come up to scratch in Division Lobby; Majority
that used to flash forth a hundred-candlelight strong, now flickered
down to a score. Opposition growing jubilant and aggressive; Irish
Members, long quiescent, waking up as of yore. To-night Prince ARTHUR,
stung to quick by remarks from JOHN DILLON, made rattling speech
defending his Irish policy; poured contumely and scorn on heads of
Irish Members.

"You," he said, with gesture of passionate scorn, "see no source of
regeneration for Ireland but in refusal of tenants to pay their rent."

Lord ELCHO and other young bloods on Ministerial Bench cheered; old
stagers looked grave.

"Ah, ah!" said CAMPBELL-BANNERMAN, looking on from the Front
Opposition Bench, "I spy the beard of the Irish Secretary under the
muffler of the Leader of the House."

"Dear me," said ESSLEMONT, who overheard the remark; "I don't remember
BALFOUR with a beard when he was at the Irish Office. You're not
mixing him up with GRANDOLPH?"

"Get thee to a nunnery, worthy draper," said CAMPBELL-BANNERMAN, "and
in that leisurely retirement read your SHAKSPEARE."

"A nunnery!" cried ESSLEMONT, more than ever bewildered; "why they
wouldn't let me in. I suppose you mean a monastery; but man and boy
for fifty years I've gone to Kirk, and nothing would--" By this time
CAMPBELL-BANNERMAN was out of hearing.

_Business done_.--One Vote in Committee of Supply.

_Tuesday_.--The MARKISS not in his place in Lords to-night. Looked in
at Arlington Street to inquire if absence was due to illness.

"Not at all, TOBY," said the MARKISS who, indeed, looked quite fit.
"There was nothing particular on the paper to-night, so I didn't go
down. It's necessary for Nephew ARTHUR to be regular in his attendance
on the Commons. But in the Lords it's different. A happy fortune
places the Leader there in a position that relieves him from strain
of unbroken attendance. With STRATHEDEN AND CAMPBELL looking after
foreign policy, and DENMAN taking charge of home affairs, my post is
really a sinecure. They talk about ending or mending of the House of
Lords; but as long as we are blessed with this remarkable combination
of legislative and administrative capacity we can laugh at the idle
threats."

It was DENMAN who took the floor to-night; moved Second Reading of
a Bill, the simple and comprehensive object of which was to repeal
Local Government Acts of England and Scotland. These passed only a
Session or two ago by continuous united effort of both Houses of
Parliament. DENMAN been closely watching them in operation. Finds
them disappointing, and so would have them repealed. House fully
constituted, with LORD CHANCELLOR on Woolsack, Mace on Table, and
quorum present; gravely listens, whilst tall, white-haired, sad-faced
man rambles on in plaintive voice, urging proposition which, if
carried out, would arrest machinery of Local Government throughout
the Kingdom, leaving all to be gone over again. No one smiles, much
less winks or wags the head. It is just as solemn and as orderly as
if it were the MARKISS himself submitting a Resolution or making
a statement. Only, when the plaintive voice ceases and the tall
figure is reseated on the Bench, nobody proposes to continue the
conversation. LORD CHANCELLOR rapidly gabbles shibboleth in which
"content" stumbles over "not content."

"Notcontentshaveit," says LORD CHANCELLOR, by way of last word;
leaves Woolsack; the few Peers slowly pass out. It seems the House has
adjourned, DENMAN's Motion being negatived without Division, and Local
Government in England and Scotland will proceed to-morrow as it has
gone on to-day.

_Business done_.--House of Commons, having agreed to meet at two
o'clock to-morrow instead of twelve, makes up for it by getting itself
Counted Out at eight o'clock.

_Wednesday_.--Came across LOCKWOOD this afternoon in remote part
of corridor, gesticulating whilst he recited some lines. Fancy he's
getting up that lecture on the "Lawyers in _Pickwick_," announced for
delivery in York on the 15th. Most interesting undertaking. As CHARLES
RUSSELL says, "_Coke-upon-Lyttleton_ will have to take a back shelf in
the Law libraries when _Lockwood-upon-Dickens_ is in circulation."

Wonder how he finds time for these excursions into the bye-paths
of literature? Hands full at the Bar; frequent attendant here; and
yet he has time to discover _Pickwick_! He tells me great secret of
capability for this kind of work is plain living and regular habits.

"A chop or steak at eight o'clock with a potato (boiled in its jacket)
and a tumbler of toast-and-water; that's my regular dinner; leaves me
clear-headed and free for a couple of hours' work at my briefs before
I go to bed. Except when kept down at House, rarely out of bed after
eleven. Up at five; cold bath; dry toast; hot milk; another grind
at my briefs; ride down to Court; at it all day, with intervals for
Abernethy biscuit when Court adjourns; and so the mill goes round."

"Don't you think," said BOB REID, "it's a little unprofessional of
LOCKWOOD going into this _Pickwick_ business? The cases were never,
that I know of, reported in the _Law Journal_. Good fellow LOCKWOOD,
but a little apt to stray outside the ropes. Now he's started
lecturing, there's no knowing how far he'll go. We may see him on the
stage bowling BEERBOHM TREE out as _Hamlet_, or even with his face
corked, dancing a breakdown at St. James's Hall. What does he want to
go a-lecturing for? Do you think he'll draw?"

"Draw!" I cried. "Why, he's always drawing; he's drawn for _Punch_."
That shut up Master BOB. When you want to hear disparaging remarks
about a man, nothing like going to his bosom friend. _Business
done_.--Irish.

[Illustration: "Monumental Suavity."]

_Thursday_.--Mr. G. in fine form to-night; delivered two speeches,
each in highest form of Parliamentary Debate. Infinite variety in
manner. Before dinner, Prince ARTHUR moved to take Morning Sittings
on Tuesdays and Fridays for rest of Session. That means virtual
appropriation on very threshold of Session of time belonging to
private Members. They furious; Mr. G. in benignest mood; shocked, he
must confess, at Prince ARTHUR's unparalleled greed; but not disposed
to turn a deaf ear to his importunity. "If you'd make it Easter, now,"
he said, with winning voice and manner, "limit the scope of resolution
to that date, I'm not sure that I should feel disposed to say you
nay."

Prince ARTHUR jumped at proposal. Sufficient unto Easter are the
Morning Sittings thereof. If he wanted more he could ask again.
Meanwhile he was in possession of what he wanted.

House looked on in amazement at this little scene. Opposition expected
Mr. G. would have thundered forth denunciations of Prince ARTHUR's
audacity. Here he was making terms with the enemy; doing it all, too,
with imposingly judicial manner that was irresistible. Before House
quite knew where it was, everything was settled.

"'Now I'm furnished, Now I'm furnished, for my flight'--of oratory."

It was BLUNDELL MAPLE chanting this line, sung in another place
by _Hecate_. Flight didn't amount to more than asking question as
to whether audiences at unlicensed places of entertainment (in
neighbourhood of Tottenham Court Road or elsewhere) open for Radical
or Liberal entertainments, are duly protected from fire? Members went
off to dinner, pondering on this conundrum. Came back to find Mr. G.
on his legs again, denouncing proposition to vote L20,000 for survey
of railway from Mombasa to Nyanza. A splendid piece of invective;
almost literally shrivelled up poor JOKIM, at whom some of the
scorching flame was pointed with outstretched forefinger. For more
than half an hour, at period of night when most gentlemen of his
years are snugly tucked up in bed, Mr. G. held the audience entranced,
thunderous cheers rolling forth in rapid succession from Liberal
ranks, now and then answered by low growl from Ministerialists.

[Illustration: The Man who Owns a Mountain.]

"What a man it is!" cried KENRICK, looking on with monumental suavity;
"almost sorry he left us. Sometimes, at his best, he equals our JOE."
_Business done_.--A couple of Votes in Supply.

_Friday_.--BRYCE at last got access to mountains in Scotland.

Been wandering round foot of them through many Sessions, and several
Parliaments. Always something happened to prevent his reaching the
top. Don't believe he'd have got there to-night, only for FARQUHARSON.

When F. came forward to second Motion, incidentally observing, "I'm
the proprietor of a mountain myself," we felt something must be done,
and BRYCE's Motion was agreed to.

FARQUHARSON, for rest of evening, object of respectful regard. Some
inquiry as to where he kept his mountain. Did he bring it to Town
with him when he came up for the Session? And, when at home, was he in
habit of leaving it out all night?

"Don't happen to have it about you, I suppose?" WILFRID LAWSON asked,
eyeing his trousers' pockets.

FARQUHARSON very reticent on subject. Rumour, just before House
adjourned, that his mountain is one of those situated in the Moon--but
this only envy.

_Business done_.--Access secured to FARQUHARSON's mountain and others
in Scotland.

       *       *       *       *       *

STRANGE CHARGE AGAINST A GREAT POET.--Lord TENNYSON's _Robin Hood_
is to be produced at DALY's, New York, and simultaneously, to secure
copyright, by one performance only, at the Lyceum. We never thought
TENNYSON a plagiarist before this, but here is proof positive he's at
it now,--Lord TENNYSON's _robbing Hood_!!

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTICE.--Rejected Communications or Contributions, whether MS.,
Printed Matter, Drawings, or Pictures of any description, will in no
case be returned, not even when accompanied by a Stamped and Addressed
Envelope, Cover, or Wrapper. To this rule there will be no exception.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch, Or The London Charivari, Volume
102, March 12, 1892, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH ***

***** This file should be named 14364.txt or 14364.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/4/3/6/14364/

Produced by Malcolm Farmer, William Flis, and the PG Online
Distributed Proofreading Team


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
