The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Wreck, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Wreck

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: June 6, 2006 [EBook #18522]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WRECK ***




Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, LN Yaddanapudi, and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net





[Illustration: Frontispiece]




THE WRECK.


_ILLUSTRATED._


NEW YORK:
DODD, MEAD, & CO.
_PUBLISHERS._




COPYRIGHT,
BY DODD, MEAD & COMPANY,
1880.




THE WRECK.


[Illustration: The swing]

Ollie had been swinging for nearly an hour in the grove behind the old
farm-house, when she heard her mother's voice calling, "Ollie, Ollie!
where are you, child?" Ollie stopped swinging and listened. "That is
mamma," she said; "I must run quickly and see what she wants." So,
jumping down and leaving the swing to "die away" by itself, she skipped
along the path which led up to the back door. Her mother was standing on
the step, holding a basket in her hand. When she saw Ollie she said,
"Ah, here you are; I have been looking for you all over the house."

"I have been swinging, and only just heard you calling," answered Ollie.
"Do you want me?"

"Yes," said Mrs. Rogers; "I want some more sugar. I thought we had
plenty, but these new cookies that Mrs. Coe told me about do take a
great deal more than my old ones. So, go as quickly as you can, my
dear, for I am dreadfully bothered for the want of it."

[Illustration: Willie]

"Yes," said Ollie, taking the basket; "I will not be a minute. Couldn't
Willie go with me? See, he is looking through the window. I am sure a
little walk would do him good."

"No, not yet," said Mrs. Rogers. "The doctor says he must not leave the
house before next week. Now run along."

Ollie threw a kiss toward the window and started down the path. She was
just going to open the gate when she heard a "rat-tat-tat" behind her.

[Illustration: Ollie]

"Willie wants something, I am sure," she said, turning back again; "I
wonder what it is! He is pointing under that bush, but I do not see
anything. Ah, here you are, you rogue! it is you who are wanted;" and
she pulled out a great big black rabbit, Willie's especial pet. "It is
just as well that I have to go to the house again, for I forgot my
sun-umbrella, and I am sure the day is very hot."

[Illustration: The pet rabbit]

The sun-umbrella to which Ollie alluded was one of her birthday
presents, and she was always glad when the sun was hot enough to make it
useful. The rabbit being laid in Willie's lap, Ollie started off once
more, running as fast as she could to make up for lost time. In a few
minutes she reached the village. The sugar was soon bought and tucked
away in the basket.

Ollie ran along, and was just hesitating whether she should climb the
fence and run through Squire Thompson's lot, or go around by the road,
when she saw, just before her, Lucy Coit, walking along with her
school-books in her bag.

"There is Lucy," said Ollie; "I wonder what she is doing with her bag
of books at this time of day. I will run up and ask her."

[Illustration: Lucy]

Ollie soon overtook her schoolmate, and putting her arm around her waist
they walked on together.

"I could not imagine what you were carrying your school-books for," said
Ollie. "You can't have been kept after school, for you always know your
lessons so well."

"No," said Lucy, "I wasn't kept after, but I stayed myself. I couldn't
get a sum in fractions right, and Miss Palmer said if I would wait till
every one had gone she would show me about it. Now I know it, and I am
going down to the beach. Don't you want to go too?"

"Oh, yes," said Ollie; "but I must take this sugar to mamma first.
Let's climb over these bars and cut across this field. It is a great
deal shorter than by the road."

[Illustration: Geese]

There were some geese in the field, which evidently did not like to have
their privacy intruded upon, for they set up a terrible quacking as the
children passed them. Ollie and Lucy, however, quacked back again, and
the geese soon left them and continued to nibble away at the grass.

Ollie soon reached her home, and leaving her basket on the table she ran
up-stairs to find her mother, for she wanted permission to go to the
beach.

"Yes," said Mrs. Rogers, "you may go; but it looks a little showery, and
I don't want you to get wet. Watch the clouds, and if you see a storm
coming, hurry home, so as to get in before the rain."

Ollie promised to do as she was told and kissing her mother good-by she
ran down-stairs. She found Lucy standing by the fence, looking over
into Mr. Beech's yard. Mr. Beech lived next to Ollie's papa, and he had
one little girl. Every one called her "Chubby," because she was so plump
and round.

[Illustration: Chubby]

"Lucy," called Ollie, "what are you doing?"

"Come here a minute," said Lucy.

Ollie went to the fence, and there she saw Chubby holding a basket full
of delicious ripe strawberries. "Why, Chubby," said Ollie, "what are you
going to do with those lovely berries? How good they look, don't they,
Lucy?"

"Oh," said Chubby, "I must be very careful, for they do roll about so
that I can hardly carry them. You may each have one, but I cannot spare
more, because they are for my tea-party."

So Chubby passed the basket very carefully to the children, while each
one helped herself, and then she started to walk carefully over the
grass toward a seat under a big tree.

"And what is your party?" asked Lucy. "It must be a very nice one, I
think, if you have such things as those to eat."

"Oh, there it is," said Chubby; and looking in the direction of her
finger the children saw a table covered with a white cloth, and a pretty
blue tea-set upon it.

[Illustration: The tea-party]

They had evidently been very hungry when they began the feast, for not a
crumb remained upon one of the plates, and three little girls were
sitting there, waiting patiently for a fresh supply of good things.
Ollie and Lucy watched Chubby till she set her plate of berries safely
upon the table, and then, turning around, they remembered that they
had only a short time to stay at the beach, and that consequently they
had better not lose any more time in loitering by the way.

It was only a quarter of a mile from Ollie's house to the water, and it
did not take long to get over the ground which lay between. Ollie was
never tired of the ocean, and it was a rare thing for her to let a day
pass without spending some time on the shore.

Some one was there before them, and at first the children could not
imagine whom it could be; but as they drew nearer they saw that it was
Miss Palmer, their teacher. She had thrown off her hat, and was reading
so earnestly that she neither saw nor heard the children till they were
close upon her.

Miss Palmer was very much beloved by all of her scholars, and they
thought nothing a greater treat than to sit by her side and listen while
she told them stories or talked to them. So when our two little friends
saw who it was, they ran and sat down, one on each side of her.

[Illustration: Mrs. Palmer]

Miss Palmer looked up, and upon seeing who it was that had interrupted
her she closed her book, and said she was just wishing she had some one
to talk to.

"Do you notice how still it is?" she said, "and how close and hot the
air is? I fear we are going to have a terrible storm. We must watch the
clouds, and run a race with them. If we get home first, all will be
well, but if the clouds do, alas for our clothes!"

Just as she spoke they heard a low muttering of thunder, and then
suddenly a blast of cold wind rushed by them. The big black clouds
rolled rapidly up, and in a moment the whole scene before them was
changed. The ocean began to have a lowering, angry look, and a schooner
which had been lying lazily in the water gave a bound forward like a
live creature, and sped on its way. Miss Palmer sprang to her feet,
saying, "Now, children, the time for the race has come. The rain is
determined to get there first, but so are we; see who will win the
race."

[Illustration: Schooner]

So all three started on at a quick pace. One big drop fell on Lucy's
hand, and they hurried on. The race was barely theirs, for just as they
stepped in at the door a blinding flash of lightning came, and a crash
of thunder almost at the same instant, which made them glad enough that
they were safely housed.

Although the thunder and lightning ceased after a while, and even the
rain poured itself out, the wind continued to blow furiously. Lucy
waited till she dared wait no longer, and then said that she must go
home, for she knew her mother was already anxious about her.

"Oh, you can't go, Lucy," said Ollie; "see how that great tree bends;
why, you couldn't keep on your feet for one minute."

Just then they looked out of the window and saw Ollie's father riding
by. He had just stopped to speak to some one, and Ollie, losing no time,
opened the window and called to him.

[Illustration: Ollie's father]

"Papa, papa," she called, "do you think it is safe for Lucy to try to go
home?"

The wind was making such a terrible noise that Ollie's voice could not
be heard.

Mr. Rogers dismounted and came to the window. He did not think it at all
safe for Lucy to go home in such a gale, and promised instead to go
to Mr. Coit's house and beg permission for Lucy to stay all night with
Ollie.

Of course both of the children were overjoyed with this arrangement, and
begun at once to amuse themselves. Ollie's papa soon came back, bringing
with him a bag for Lucy, which contained everything that she could
possibly want during the night.

The wind, instead of abating, increased in fury. It roared and screamed
about the house like an angry wild beast. It caught up the clothes which
old Milly had spread upon the grass to bleach, and whirled them round
and round in circles over the house, and carried them off no one knew
where. It seized the old bucket which hung in the well, and swung it
back and forth with such force that no one dared go near enough to
fasten it.

At eight o'clock the children went to bed, and in spite of the wind they
were soon sleeping soundly. All was still within the house, and both
Lucy and Ollie were too much used to storms on the sea-shore to be
disturbed by them.

Suddenly, however, Lucy started from her bed. What was that sound?
surely it was the slamming of the front door. While she was listening
she saw something which made her heart beat fast. It was a rocket which
shot by her window. Another and another followed. Lucy sprang out of bed
and began to dress. There was hardly a child in Spehunket who did not
know the terrible meaning of the rocket soaring into the air in the
dead of night.

[Illustration: Lucy wakes up Ollie]

Lucy hastily slipped on her clothes, and then, going back to the bed,
she took Ollie's hand and called softly,

"Ollie, Ollie! wake up. There is a wreck, and I think some of the people
have gone down to the beach. Don't you want to go too?"

Ollie started up, looking frightened at being so suddenly roused. "What
is it? what is it?" she asked excitedly. "What is the matter?"

"There is a wreck, Ollie," said Lucy, "and the men at the life-saving
station are hard at work. Oh, Ollie! just think of the poor things
clinging to the ship, and expecting every moment to go down! I must go
down there and see if I can't do something to help."

By this time Ollie was wide awake, and as interested as Lucy. It did not
take her long to dress, and in a few minutes they went softly
down-stairs. Mrs. Rogers' bed-room door was open, and upon looking in
the children saw that Ollie's papa and mamma had gone to the beach. As
there was no one of whom they could ask permission, each little girl
wrapped herself warmly in a woollen shawl, and drawing the bolt of the
kitchen door they stepped out into the night.

It was two o'clock, and during the six hours which had passed since they
went to bed the wind had abated in force somewhat. The sky was full of
black, angry-looking clouds, but the moon was struggling to make
herself seen. On the whole, it was not a dark night, and the children
found no difficulty whatever in seeing the well-worn path which led
through their field to the beach. If they had been doubtful of the way
they would have been guided by the bonfires, and by an occasional rocket
which shot up into the air; but as it was they knew the road well, and
excepting when the moon was hidden for a moment behind a cloud, all was
bright around them.

They soon reached the beach, and were there just in time to see the men
from the station bring down the life-boat. It was a hard pull through
the sand, but the feat was soon accomplished, and the boat was left near
the water's edge, to be ready in case the line from the mortar should
fail to reach the wreck.

[Illustration: The Life-boat]

The mortar was standing there, and the men were preparing to send out
the line which was to bring succor to the terrified passengers on the
wreck. At the word of command the string was pulled--"_Bang_," and off
went the line, curving through the air. Every one watched in breathless
anxiety to see if it would reach the ship. Yes, on it went, and then
dropped down upon the deck.

A shout of joy rose up from the crowd upon the beach, and it must have
been answered by those on the wreck, but every sound was lost in the
roaring of the wind and of the angry waves. In an instant a stronger
line was attached, and to that, after being drawn on board and securely
fastened to the mast, a little car was attached and was quickly drawn on
board. Into this car one human being could get at a time, and could be
drawn over the breakers safely to the shore.

The work of the night now began in earnest. Back and forth went the car.
Sometimes it brought back a little child, sometimes a papa or mamma, and
at last the sailors one by one, and then, last of all, the faithful
captain, who would not leave his ship until he had seen all his
passengers and crew safely on the land.

When they began working the car Lucy and Ollie stood by looking on, and
longing to help those brave men. But they were only little girls, and
what could they do?

"Ollie," said Lucy, "I have an idea. Do you see that bonfire? It is
nearly out. If you will gather some sticks and build it up again, I will
run back to your house, and get some coffee and a kettle. I think a cup
of coffee would refresh these men wonderfully."

"Oh, yes, Lucy," said Ollie, "run--run quickly. Tell Milly to help you.
I saw Sambo here a moment ago--oh, here he is. Sambo, Sambo, go back to
the house with Miss Lucy and help her bring some things which she
wants."

Lucy and Sambo were off in a hurry, and as soon as they were gone Ollie
gathered all the drift-wood she could find, and proceeded immediately to
brighten up the fire, which had nearly died away. She worked steadily
and quietly, and by the time she had a bright blaze Lucy reappeared with
a big package of coffee, a pot, and a pail of water. They filled the pot
and put it over the fire and waited for it to boil. It seemed a long
time before the steam began to rise, but gradually it became more and
more dense, until at last the cover of the pot began to dance up and
down, and the delightful bubbling sound greeted their ears which told
that the water was boiling.

The coffee was already in the coffee-pot, and in a short time the
grateful fragrance rose upon the air.

"Oh, oh," said Ollie, "we have neither milk nor sugar!"

"I never thought of that," said Lucy, in a disappointed tone, "but I
know they must have some at the lifesaving-station."

"I knows where they keeps it, miss, for I used to be on the crew once,"
said Sambo; "I'll be back in a jiffy with it."

So off went Sambo. The sugar was found, but alas, there was no milk.

"Never mind," said Ollie; "they must take it as it is. It will do them
just as much good."

[Illustration: Man in the surf]

Now all this time the brave men of the life-saving station had been hard
at work, drawing the car back and forth, and they had just brought in
the captain, who, as I said, stood faithfully by his ship until all on
board had been rescued, when some one shouted,

"A man--a man in the surf!" They rushed into the water and looked
anxiously before them. Yes, there he was, clinging to a piece of the
broken mast. His strength was almost gone, and just as a big wave was
about to break over him two strong pairs of hands seized and dragged him
almost exhausted to the shore.

"Would you like some hot coffee? Would you like some hot coffee?"

"What's that I hear about hot coffee?" said one and another joyfully.
"Hot coffee! why, who has been good enough to think of that?"

"A cup of coffee would be a good thing," said Joe Brown; "for the fact
is, I for one am just about beat out."

Lucy and Ollie were quite delighted at the success of their undertaking,
and for the next half hour were busy enough in pouring and passing the
coffee. Not only were the men of the station thankful for a good drink,
but so were the poor tired and frightened passengers; and the children
had all they could do to fill up the cups fast enough.

They received a great many thanks and a great many praises for their
thoughtfulness, and when they were through the captain of the wrecked
steamer proposed three cheers for the kind little girls who had done so
much to refresh them.

The cheers were hearty enough, and the children were quite embarrassed
to have the attention of so many people called to them. They felt quite
repaid for all their trouble when they saw how refreshed every one
looked after taking a cup of their good hot coffee.

After a while the crowd began to move on toward the station. The crew
rolled up their ropes and proceeded to drag up the boat, which they had
not needed after all.

All were happy and thankful that no lives had been lost, but the poor
passengers were rather melancholy at the thought of probably losing all
their luggage. Every one was wet through, and it was necessary that they
should get on dry clothes as soon as possible.

All the houses in the village were opened to the sufferers, and soon
every one was made comfortable. Clothing of all sorts was lent them, for
the morrow, but in the mean time they were glad to go to bed and get a
good rest and sleep.

Ollie and Lucy went back to bed too, but no sleep came to them. They
talked until they saw the morning dawn, and soon after sunrise they rose
and dressed for breakfast.

After breakfast they went down on the beach again to look at the wreck,
and they spent a great deal of time there watching it. A great many
efforts were made to save her, but all in vain. One day, when the wind
was unusually high, a great wave struck her side, a crash was heard,
and down she went, out of sight forever, beneath the waves.

"Now," said Lucy, "I suppose I must go home. Mamma will be impatient to
see me and to know that I am all right after the storm."

"And you want to see her too, I have no doubt," said Ollie.

"Yes, indeed I do, but I should like to come back again. It is such fun
to have a girl of my own age to talk to; but mamma has to be very busy
this week, and I must get back and help her."

So Lucy walked toward the house. She wanted to get her bag, and to say
good-by to Ollie's mamma.

The two children were talking so busily as they went along that they
did not notice a horse and wagon standing at the gate of Mr. Rogers's
house, until they were close upon it.

"Why, Ollie!" exclaimed Lucy; "there is our horse; papa must have come
for me. I wonder if we have kept him waiting!"

The children hurried in, and were soon in the sitting-room, where, to
their surprise, they found Mr. and Mrs. Coit, talking very busily.

"Oh, mamma!" said Lucy, running forward to get a good-morning kiss,
"have you come for me? It was too bad to keep you waiting; I will be
ready in one minute."

"I have not come to take you away," said Mrs. Coit, "but to beg Mrs.
Rogers to keep you a little longer."

"Ah, Miss Lucy," said Ollie, laughing, "you see they have found it so
pleasant to be without you that they are going to give you to us."

Lucy looked from one to another in surprise. "What do you mean, mamma?"
she asked; "am I to stay here? what for? how long?"

"I will tell you," said her mother. "Just after Mr. Rogers left our
house with your bag, last night, your father brought a letter from the
post-office from your Aunt Mary. She is going to move out West, and
wants us to go on and make her a visit before she leaves. We are going
to take Willie, for I think a change of air would do him good, after his
illness; but your aunt's house is so small, I do not think it is best
for you to go. As Mrs. Rogers has consented to keep you, I think you had
better stay here."

"Oh, good, good, good!" exclaimed Ollie, clapping her hands and jumping
around the room for joy. "Now you will have to stay, and be my sister
for a good long week."

Lucy hardly knew whether to be glad or sorry. She was delighted to stay
with her friend, but the thought of being so long away from her mamma
made her feel almost homesick.

"I will write you a letter every day," said Mrs. Coit, seeing the cloud
on her little girl's face.

But the cloud only stayed a minute. "After all," she thought, "mamma
will only be gone for a week, and I would much rather be here with
Ollie than at Aunt Mary's, where there is no one of my own age; and a
letter every day! oh, that will be _too_ delightful!"

"Well, I must go," said Mrs. Coit. "Thank you very much, Mrs. Rogers,
for taking Lucy; I hope she will be a good child, and not give you any
trouble. Good-by."

"Martha will send over your trunk this afternoon," she continued to
Lucy. "It is all packed, and William Henry Johnson said he'd bring it
over on his way to the mill this evening. Good-by, my dear," and Lucy
was seized, hugged, and kissed, and almost before she knew what it was
all about her mother had gone, and she was left alone, watching the
wagon as it rolled slowly down the road.

She was roused by hearing Ollie's voice close behind her.

"Oh, Lucy, let's go up-stairs, and get the room ready for you. I must
move the things in my closet, and make enough bare nails for your
dresses."

So the two girls went up-stairs together, and the afternoon was passed
in preparations for the coming week.

The next morning Lucy and Ollie went to school as usual, only instead of
having a long solitary walk, they each had the other's company, which
they found very pleasant. The girls at school were quite astonished to
hear that they were spending the week together.

As they were walking back from school, they saw on the beach the signal
which was always used to show that there were fish in sight.

"Oh, let us hurry through our dinner," said Ollie, "and go down to the
beach. I love to see them draw in their big nets full of fish. It is
such fun."

Mrs. Rogers was astonished to see two wild children rush into the house,
all out of breath, exclaiming,

"Isn't dinner ready? We are in such a hurry to get down to the beach."

"Yes, dinner is ready," said Mrs. Rogers; "you can sit down as soon as
you like."

As soon as they had eaten as much as they wanted, and had been excused,
they rushed to the beach. The men were just preparing to launch the big
boat through the surf. When the children came in sight, the captain of
the crew saw them and said,

"Hold up a minute; here are our little friends; they always enjoy a
dance on the waves; let's wait, and take them in."

So they beckoned to the children, and in a few minutes they were seated
in the boat. The word of command was given, and off they went--now up on
the top of the wave, now down, down, down.

They had an unusually good haul of fish, which the men insisted was all
owing to the presence of the two little girls. They stayed on the beach
or in the boat all the afternoon, and finally went home to supper so
hungry that Mrs. Rogers laughingly declared that she could not possibly
cook enough in one day to satisfy them.

Mrs. Coit kept her promise and wrote to Lucy every day, and between her
letters and her good times with Ollie, the days passed so quickly that
Lucy was surprised to find at last that the hour for her departure had
arrived.

"How little we thought that day when I walked home with you that I was
to be here a week!"

"I wish we were going to have it all over again," said Ollie.

"So do I," said Lucy.


THE END.


Transcriber's Note

The following typos have been corrected.

Page  Typo      Correction
13    shorer    shorter
46    joyfully  joyfully.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Wreck, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WRECK ***

***** This file should be named 18522.txt or 18522.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/5/2/18522/

Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, LN Yaddanapudi, and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

