The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is Going On
In It, Vol. 1, No. 33, June 24, 1897, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Great Round World and What Is Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 33, June 24, 1897
       A Weekly Magazine for Boys and Girls

Author: Various

Editor: Julia Truitt Bishop

Release Date: May 1, 2005 [EBook #15740]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.(www.pgdp.net)









_FIVE CENTS._

THE GREAT ROUND WORLD
AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT

  Vol. 1                JUNE 24, 1897                No. 33.
[Entered at Post Office, New York City, as second class matter]

[Illustration: A
WEEKLY
NEWSPAPER
FOR
BOYS AND
GIRLS]

Subscription
$2.50 per year
$1.25 6 months


    WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON. PUBLISHER
    NO. 3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST. NEW YORK CITY

=Copyright, 1897, by WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON.=

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: The Scientific Box Kite

How to put in the sticks

The Start]

     =PATENT APPLIED FOR=
     =The Latest Thing...=
     =Scientific Box Kite=

     To any one sending us =1= new subscriber we will send one of these
     kites.

Scientific kite flying has attracted the attention of the world. This
kite is the invention of H.H. Clayton, Chief Observer at Blue Hill
Observatory, near Boston. It is used at this and other weather stations
for sending up instruments in making observations. Kites of this type
have attained the wonderful height of 9,200 feet, nearly two miles.

Anybody can fly this kite. It goes up straight from the hand like a
bird. Will fly in a moderate breeze, and yet no wind short of a gale is
too strong for it. It is made of strong, selected wood, and the finest
cotton, in red.

     =THE GREAT ROUND WORLD=
     =3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST.              NEW YORK CITY=

       *       *       *       *       *

     =Appletons' Home-Reading Books=

     Edited by W.T. HARRIS, A.M., LL.D.
     _U.S. Commissioner of Education_


This comprehensive series of books will present upon a symmetrical plan
the best available literature in the various fields of human learning,
selected with a view to the needs of students of all grades in
supplementing their school studies and for home reading.

It is believed that this project will fully solve the long-standing
problem as to what kind of reading shall be furnished to the young, and
what will most benefit them intellectually as well as morally.

             The following volumes are now ready:

     =The Story of the Birds.=  By JAMES NEWTON BASKETT. 65 cts. _net._
     =The Plant World.=  By FRANK VINCENT. 60 cts. _net._
     =The Story of Oliver Twist.=  Edited by ELLA B. KIRK. 60 cts. _net._
     =In Brook and Bayou.=  By CLARA KERN BAYLISS. 60 cts. _net._
     =Curious Homes and their Tenants.=  By JAMES CARTER BEARD.
          65 cts. _net._

             (_Others in preparation_)

     These books will be found especially desirable for school use, in
     supplementing class-room studies


     =D. APPLETON & COMPANY, New York, Boston, Chicago=

       *       *       *       *       *


=The Second Bound Volume=

OF

=THE GREAT ROUND WORLD=

(Containing Nos. 16 to 30)

=IS NOW READY=


     Handsomely bound in strong cloth, with title on side and back.
     Price, postage paid, $1.25. Subscribers may exchange their numbers
     by sending them to us (express paid) with 35 cents to cover cost of
     binding, and 10 cents for return carriage.


  Address
=_3 and 5 West 18th Street, . . . . . . New York City_=

       *       *       *       *       *

    AS A
    =SPECIAL INDUCEMENT=

    for our subscribers to interest others in "The Great Round
    World," we will give to each subscriber who sends us $2.50 to
    pay for a year's subscription to a new name, a copy of

    =Rand, McNally & Co.=
      =1897 Atlas of the World.=

    =160 pages of colored maps from new plates, size 11 1/2 x 14
    inches, printed on special paper with marginal index, and well
    worth its regular price - - - - $2.50.=


Every one has some sort of an atlas, doubtless, but an old atlas is no
better than an old directory; countries do not move away, as do people,
but they do change and our knowledge of them increases, and this atlas,
made in 1897 from =new= plates, is perfect and up to date and covers every
point on

    =The Great Round World.=

Those not subscribers should secure the subscription of a friend and remit
$5 to cover it and their own. A copy of the atlas will be sent to either
address.

       *       *       *       *       *

GREAT ROUND WORLD,
_3 and 5 West 18th Street, . . . . . . . .New York City._

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE GREAT ROUND
WORLD
AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT.]

    VOL. 1   JUNE 24, 1897.   NO. 33

       *       *       *       *       *

The affairs of Cuba are still occupying a very important place in the
eyes of the world.

The dissatisfaction in Spain over the Cuban policy of the Government has
led to serious political troubles in Madrid.

In every Congress or Parliament there are always two or more parties
opposed to each other, and on this opposition the welfare of the country
to a great extent depends. Were all the members to agree, there would be
an end of progress. It is the discontent that men feel over a present
state of affairs that spurs them on to make changes, and through these
changes all the progress of the world has come about.

In a Congress there are generally two strong parties--one that sides
with the Government, and one that is opposed to it.

This does not mean that one party is always ready to quarrel and find
fault with every measure proposed by the other. It means that there is a
party which belongs to the Government, and is pledged to vote for the
measures it proposes, and an opposition party which watches the
Government, questions its acts, and will not vote for its measures
until quite sure that they are good and helpful.

In countries that are ruled by a sovereign, the Government is not formed
in the same way that ours is.

The sovereign rules for life, and appoints the Prime Minister and the
Cabinet officers, who remain in office as long as they can manage the
affairs of state properly. The Parliament or Congress is composed of two
Houses, like ours, but the Upper House, which resembles our Senate, is
composed of peers (dukes, marquises, earls, viscounts, and barons) who
are not elected, but have their seat in the Upper House by right of
birth. Added to these are the Bishops and Churchmen of high degree, and,
in some countries, certain distinguished persons appointed by the
sovereign.

The members of the Lower House are elected, as our Congressmen are. In
Spain they are elected for five years, in England they lose their seats
every time the Ministry changes.

As we have said, the Prime Minister only keeps his office while he can
control affairs. When he finds that the Parliament will no longer uphold
the plans and wishes of the Ministry, he goes to his sovereign, resigns
his office, and a new Minister is appointed.

This is just what has been happening in Spain.

The people, displeased at the way the Cuban affairs were being managed,
complained of the Government, and at the same time demanded that General
Weyler should be recalled from the island.

At first the murmurs were not heeded, but they grew louder, until
finally the people demanded that the Duke of Tetuan, the Minister of
Foreign Affairs, should be removed, for they supposed it was his fault
that their requests were not granted.

The Duke himself put the finishing touch to the matter by boxing the
ears of one of the members of the opposition party with whom he got into
a heated discussion over the Morgan Bill.

The Spanish Parliament, the Cortes, was furious over this rude and
extraordinary conduct. The opposition party absolutely refused to have
anything to do with the Government party, to which the Duke belonged. No
business could therefore be transacted in the Cortes, because the
opposition would neither argue nor vote on the measures proposed.

It was suggested that the best way out of the difficulty was for the
Duke to resign, but the Prime Minister, Senor Canovas, was unwilling
that he should do so while Cuban matters were in such a very unsettled
condition. He thought the best thing for the country would be a change
of Ministry, and so he offered his resignation to the Queen.

The opposition rejoiced when the news of Senor Canovas's resignation was
announced. The leader of the opposition, Senor Sagasta, was known to be
in favor of giving the Cubans very liberal home rule, and also of
recalling Weyler. Every one thought that he would be made Prime Minister
in the place of Senor Canovas.

The Queen Regent, who rules Spain for her little son Alfonso, who is not
old enough to govern for himself, sent for Senor Sagasta, and, as it is
always the custom when a Prime Minister resigns for the sovereign to
offer the post to the leader of the opposition party, every one thought
Senor Sagasta was as good as appointed.

The surprise was great therefore when the Queen, after her interview
with Senor Sagasta, sent for Senor Canovas, and asked him to continue to
be Prime Minister.

Senor Canovas accepted, much to the disgust of the opposition, but their
anger knew no bounds when it was learned that the ill-mannered Duke of
Tetuan was also to keep his place.

Spain is very much excited about the recall of Senor Canovas, and it is
thought that the Queen has made matters much worse by retaining him in
office.

The Cortes has adjourned, and will not meet again for some time, but it
is said that the opposition will not forgive the Duke of Tetuan's
insult, and that when the Cortes reassembles, they will clog the wheels
of Government just as they did before.

It was supposed that the Queen would be glad to change her Ministers,
and have the Government in the hands of men who would try to make
friends with Cuba, and end the war, but she does not appear to wish to
make friends with them. She has arranged to saddle Cuba with a new debt
of twenty million dollars and extra custom-house duties.

The twenty millions is to make good the paper money we were speaking
about in No. 30, but as the twenty millions is only to be in bonds, and
not in money, people who understand such matters declare that it will
not help at all; the people will not have any more faith in one piece of
paper than in the other. The extra burden will therefore be in vain.

There has meanwhile been some excitement in Havana over the escape of a
Spaniard named Santiago Barroeta.

He has been holding official positions in Cuba for years, and is besides
the editor and owner of a Havana newspaper. When the war broke out he
joined the Spanish forces and fought to suppress the insurrection.

He was very friendly with Weyler until the Marquis de Apezteguia went to
Madrid, to tell the Spanish Government of Weyler's cruelties.

The General then sought out Mr. Barroeta and asked him to abuse the
Marquis in his newspaper.

This Mr. Barroeta refused to do. For one reason the Marquis was a friend
of his, and for another, he knew that the facts laid before the
Government by Apezteguia were strictly true.

When General Weyler found that he could not make Mr. Barroeta do as he
wished, he began to persecute him, and at last made a charge against him
of stealing public money, and ordered his arrest.

Mr. Barroeta's friends warned him of his danger, and he was able to
escape, and keep in hiding until he could get passage on an American
ship.

Once safely in this country, he set about writing a full account of the
doings of General Weyler. This he is publishing, and as soon as it is
quite ready he will set out for Spain to lay the matter before the Queen
Regent.

He declares that General Weyler is indeed a monster of cruelty, and that
the descriptions which have reached us are absolutely correct. He
asserts that General Weyler has no loyalty or love of his country, that
his one aim is to make money for himself, and to do this he will cheat
his Government, and commit any crimes and cruelties that are necessary
to cover up his wrong-doings.

Mr. Barroeta has letters and documents to prove his accusations against
General Weyler, and a full account of the way the war news is
manufactured in Cuba under the General's directions.

According to his statements Weyler has a friend in the Spanish Cortes,
who cables him when the Government is getting angry at his want of
success, and advises him to send news of a big battle. Weyler then sends
out a few men to seize a Cuban hospital, or murder a defenceless family
of peasants, and as soon as the work is done, cables the news of his
great victory to Spain.

Mr. Barroeta says that Cuba is lost to Spain if General Weyler is not
recalled. He declares that the revolution is now stronger than ever,
that none of the provinces are pacified as Weyler says they are, and
that the only place where there is any semblance of peace is Santiago de
Cuba, and that only because it is under the rule of the Cubans, and is
in fact Free Cuba.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Calhoun has returned from his mission in Cuba, but we must wait a
few days before we can expect to hear the results.

A report, however, comes from Havana, that one hundred citizens of
Matanzas have sent an appeal for help to our Government, and have based
it on the misery which they say Mr. Calhoun and General Lee saw with
their own eyes.

They speak in a most pitiable way of the hunger and privations suffered
by the people who have been driven into the towns; from the description
given in the paper, these poor souls are now so thin and weak that they
can hardly drag themselves through the streets to beg for bread. They
tell of poor little children dying of starvation in the streets, of the
sufferings of the poor parents who cannot get food to keep life in their
little ones' bodies, and of this crowd of suffering, starving people,
wandering homeless through the streets begging for the charity which no
one can spare them.

The paper in which this is set forth is brought to a close with an
earnest appeal to the United States to send food to the Cubans for the
sake of humanity. The people say that Spain has been deaf to their
appeals, and their only hope is in us.

It is dreadful to think that such distress is being endured at our very
doors, and that we are powerless to prevent it.

It is no easy thing to be the President at such a time as this. Mr.
McKinley must be full of sympathy for these unhappy people, and yet his
first duty is toward the nation he has been chosen to govern; and he
dare not aid the starving Cubans, if by so doing he would bring the
horrors of war upon the people he has sworn to protect.

       *       *       *       *       *

The war in the Philippine Islands seems to be raging as fiercely as
ever.

A report comes from Manila that the widow of Dr. Rizal has gathered a
company of soldiers together, and is leading them against the Spaniards
herself. She has already won two victories, it is said.

We told you all about Dr. Rizal on p. 254 of THE GREAT ROUND WORLD.

He was one of the leaders of the insurrection against Spain, but had
been careful to let no one know of this fact. One day, however, he
confided the secret to his wife, and she did not keep it to herself, but
told it to a person in whom she had every confidence. This person
betrayed her, and her husband was arrested and shot in consequence.

After her husband was executed she determined to devote her life to the
cause for which he had been sacrificed, and gathered a troop of soldiers
about her, and has since become one of the most daring leaders of the
insurgents.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is not much news from Greece this week.

It has been arranged that the armistice shall last until the terms of
peace are decided upon. If it is found impossible to come to terms,
either party must give twenty-four hours' notice before commencing to
fight again.

Both Greeks and Turks are forbidden by the armistice to gather troops on
the lands belonging to their enemy, so Turkey has had to stop hurrying
troops into Thessaly.

The Powers are now standing firmly by Greece, and will not give in to
Turkey's demand for Thessaly.

It is said, however, that Turkey will not give back the territory she
has gained, and that the Turks have begun to arrange a form of
government for the towns of Thessaly, and are acting very much as if the
province was already theirs.

The Ministers who represent the various nations of Europe are holding
daily meetings, and consulting as to the terms of peace; but until they
arrive at some decision we must wait to know the fate of Greece.

       *       *       *       *       *

The striking tailors have not gone back to work yet. Most of them have
been brave enough to stay out and resist the temptation offered them by
the masters to go back to work at the old terms.

A few, however, have been unable to bear the strain, and have gone back
at any wages rather than be idle and in want.

It is these weaker people that the strikers always fear. The success of
a strike depends on all having the courage to wait until their demands
are granted.

When the tailors found that some of their number were at work they were
very much enraged, and for the first time since the strike began became
riotous and unruly.

They formed committees to go the rounds of the various factories, and
see if any tailors were at work in them. Those who were found in the
shops were threatened, and ordered to leave off work at once.

The contractors got angry in their turn when their men were called out,
and many fights occurred, the police being kept busy arresting the
strikers and protecting the contractors.

When the feeling had grown very bitter on both sides, a contractor
appeared in the street where most of the tailors' shops are situated.

This particular man was much disliked by his workmen and the trade
generally. The moment he appeared in sight the anger of the mob broke
loose. Men and women attacked him savagely, beating him and throwing
stones at him. Fortunately for him, he happened to have a pistol with
him, and he was able to hold the crowd at bay until the police came to
his aid.

It is to be hoped that matters may be settled without further violence.
Thus far the sympathy has been altogether with the strikers, as the bad
pay and long hours of the tailors have been well known for a very long
time.

The attention of the Government has been directed to the present strike,
and Mr. Gage, the Secretary of the Treasury, sent a committee to inquire
into it.

He had been informed that the poor pay which tailors earn was due to the
fact that there were more workers than was necessary; and the trade was
over-crowded by Russians and Poles who are willing to work for
starvation wages.

Mr. Gage wished to find out whether too many Russian immigrants were
being allowed to enter the country, and whether he ought not to restrict
immigration for the protection of the tailoring trade.

The result of his inquiries has not yet been learned.

       *       *       *       *       *

A gentleman in Texas who has read about the sufferings of the strikers,
and the poor wages they are able to earn, has written a long letter,
advising them to go out to Texas, and start fruit farms for themselves.

He says the land is waiting for workers, and the labor required is light
and pleasant. He thinks it would be much better for the tailors to go
where their labor would bring a good reward instead of starving
miserably in cities.

This suggestion is much in the same line as one made by Dr. Senner, the
Commissioner of Immigration at Ellis Island.

Dr. Senner does not think that the immigrants should be allowed to come
here and settle down where they please.

It is his idea that the Government should be kept well informed of the
places where colonists and laborers are needed, and when people come out
seeking work, they should be sent to those sections of the country where
work is waiting for those who want it.

Every ship brings out families of rough peasants seeking a home and a
living in the new country. Very few of them have friends in the places
to which they are going, and hardly any know whether it will be possible
for them to obtain work when they arrive at their journey's end.

Dr. Senner thinks these people should be directed to go where colonists
are needed, and where their industry will have a chance of bringing in
its reward.

Under the present system the immigrants are allowed to go where they
will, and they crowd into the over-filled towns by thousands, and fail
to make livings there, while enormous tracts of fertile land lie waiting
for hands to come and till it, and make it yield up its bounties.

       *       *       *       *       *

While we are speaking of immigration you will perhaps be interested to
hear of a fresh race of people who have just begun to emigrate to
America. The very first of these people passed through New York last
week, on their way to Winnipeg, Canada, where the British Government
has given them a large grant of land.

These peasants are the Russniaks or Ruthenians.

They are a people who dwell in Southern Austria and Southeastern Poland,
where these countries join Russia. They really belong to the family of
people who live in that part of Southern Russia which is called Little
Russia, and they speak the language of this district, which is known as
Little Russian.

These Russniaks are not little Russians in appearance. They are in fact
a race of giants. In the party that came over none of the men were less
than six feet tall, and two or three of them were more than seven feet
in height. The women were also very tall and fine looking.

The party consisted of nine men, ten women, and twenty-five children.
One of the number who could speak a little German said that they were
farmers and goatherds, and had come out to Canada on the advice of a
British agent, who promised them that they would be able to earn lots of
money and be free from taxes in Winnipeg.

The dress of these people was very picturesque.

Both men and women wore sheepskin coats, made with the hair inside, and
laced down the front with leathern thongs. Both wore rough hide boots,
the men having the tops of theirs turned down and covered with handsome
embroidery.

The women and children had white homespun linen skirts, embroidered at
the edges, and the men had trousers of the same material.

Neither women nor children had any stockings, and the children had
their arms and heads bare, as well as their legs.

Each man wore a wide, beautifully embroidered belt, from which hung a
long sheath-knife and two or three pouches made of skin, which held
food, water, and tobacco. On their heads the men wore broad straw hats
with cock's feathers stuck at the side.

The women had no hats, but a quaint linen headdress, with a long veil
hanging from it and flowing over their shoulders.

They were a handsome people, and all appeared clean, neat, and tidy.

       *       *       *       *       *

Word has reached us that the great diamond belonging to the Nizam of
Hyderabad has not been stolen after all, and so Queen Victoria may still
get her present.

If you are interested in the Jubilee there is a very interesting article
in the June _Century Magazine,_ called "Queen Victoria's Coronation
Roll," in which many interesting facts are given about the Queen's
coronation in 1838. She was not crowned, you know, until a year after
she came to the throne.

This article gives extracts from the official documents, telling exactly
how the young Queen was crowned, when she wore her crown, when she
carried her sceptre and orb, and other facts that are useful as well as
entertaining.

One of the very interesting things it tells is the manner in which the
lords and nobles keep possession of their titles.

[Illustration]

In countries where there are peers and degrees of nobility, it is the
custom of the sovereign to reward any great deed by making the doer of
it a peer of the realm, that is to say, a duke, a marquis, an earl, a
viscount, or a baron; baronets and knights are not peers.

In the olden times these gifts of nobility were often accompanied by
some personal service to the sovereign, by the performance of which the
holder of the title secured his patent or right to it. At the time these
grants were made the services had some especial and important meaning.
Nowadays they only seem strange and rather silly. Despite this fact, the
services must still be rendered, else the peer loses his patent of
nobility.

The article in _The Century Magazine_ tells of these things, and how the
Duke of Norfolk is obliged to furnish the sovereign with the glove worn
on the right hand during the coronation service, and also to support the
monarch's right arm during such times as the sceptre is carried in the
hand.

Another earl is bound to carry the sword of state in the procession to
Westminster.

The peers are very proud of these privileges, and make a great boast of
them. The highest honor ever perhaps granted by a sovereign to a subject
was earned by the lords of Kinsale. In the time of King John the head of
the house performed a great service for his King, and when asked what
reward he desired, replied that he had lands and money enough, but that
he should like to have the privilege of wearing his hat in the presence
of his sovereign, and that this right might belong to the head of his
house forever.

Foolish as this right may seem to us, no Lord Kinsale would ever give it
up.

       *       *       *       *       *

You will be interested to learn that the break in the levee near New
Orleans has been closed.

It was feared that this break would prove very destructive to the
surrounding country, as it occurred in the midst of the richest sugar
districts of Louisiana.

The crevasse was four hundred feet wide, and in some places twenty-five
feet deep. No such gap had ever been closed before, and the levee
engineers declared it to be impossible to do so.

Necessity, however, decided them to make the attempt, and for the past
week a large force of engineers and bridge-makers have been at work.

They first built cribs around the crevasse; cribs are walls made of
timbers which break the first force of the waters; they do not of course
stop their flow.

When these were in place sacks were filled with earth and thrown down in
front of the cribs.

In a very short time it was seen that the sacks remained in their
places, the water coming through the cribs not having sufficient force
to wash them away.

More sacks were piled against the wooden wall, and gradually the waters
ceased to flow through the break, and the crevasse was closed.

This feat of engineering is considered the most important work of its
kind ever done. Engineers from all over the Mississippi have gone to
look at it.

Very little of the sugar-cane has been damaged by the overflow, and
people along the river are feeling very happy over the great work that
has been done.

Future floods will not seem so terrible to them now that a way has been
found of closing deep and large crevasses. * * * * *

When will the world be at peace!

The trouble in Hawaii seems to be growing more serious, and people are
saying that Japan's success in her war with China, and the prosperity
which followed her victories, have made her anxious for another war. It
is said that she is willing to fight the United States for Hawaii if her
demands about the immigrants are not agreed to.

The Japanese Minister in Hawaii, Mr. Shimamura, persists in declaring
that he has received no answer to his country's request, and has sent a
new note, which, it is said, is not so amiable in tone as that prepared
by Commissioner Akiyama.

Mr. Shimamura said again, that if he did not receive a satisfactory
reply to this note, he should leave for Tokio, and put an end to
diplomatic relations between the two countries.

In addition to this very unpleasant news it is reported that two
Japanese cruisers have been ordered to Hawaii, to join the _Naniwa_.

       *       *       *       *       *

There has been some trouble in Montana with the Cheyenne Indians.

The spring and early summer is the time when most of the Indian
uprisings occur. During the winter these people sit round in their
tepees or lodges, and listen to the tales of daring told them by their
old warriors. All the savage spirit that is in the young bucks is
excited by these tales, and the young men of the tribes become restless,
wanting to show that they too can be as brave as their fathers were.

When the spring comes, and there is enough grass to feed their ponies,
many of them slip away from the reservations, where the Government
keeps them and feeds them, and go on the war-path.

As the West has become more thickly settled these raids have been less
and less frequent, and it is now a long time since the families of
settlers have had to flee from their homes for fear of the red men.

[Illustration]

In Miles City, Mont., however, family after family has been arriving
within the last few days, seeking refuge there until the country becomes
quiet again.

The reason of this is that one of the chiefs, called White Bull, is
reported to be on the war-path with some two hundred braves.

Women and children are being sent to all the fortified camps; settlers
who are too far from camps to be able to shelter there are building
stone forts for themselves, and gathering the women and children from
the district within its walls. All over the section men are arming and
going out to fight the Indians.

The cause for this outbreak among the Indians is supposed to be the feud
that has existed for a long time between the cowboys and the Indians.

The cowboys are a very wild lot themselves, and are apt to be nearly as
dangerous as the Indians when they get excited.

Their lives are somewhat lonely, being spent in riding about the country
rounding up stock and doing the work of the ranches. They are, however,
dear lovers of a frolic, and whenever they get into the towns and have
no duties to perform, they are apt to do very boisterous and regrettable
things.

One of their very bad habits is that they drink more than is good for
them. When they are under the influence of liquor, and no longer masters
of themselves, it is their great sport to kill an Indian.

The Indians naturally do not sit quietly by and allow tipsy cowboys to
kill their friends without revenging them. They wait their chance, and
kill a cowboy in return for the Indian. This results in very bitter
feeling between the cowboys and the Indians, and warfare of a small kind
exists between the two parties, each seeking opportunities to kill the
other.

A few weeks ago a sheep-herder was shot while out looking after his
sheep.

The sheriff looked into the matter, and found that the young man had
been sitting down on the ground smoking when he was shot. All the signs
showed that his enemies had crept up behind him, and killed him without
giving him a chance to defend himself.

Traces of Indian ponies were found in the neighborhood, and these
convinced the sheriff that the work had been done by the Cheyenne
Indians from the neighboring reservation.

The sheriff immediately called a large force of deputies together, and
rode to the reservation, demanding that the guilty Indian be given up.

The Indian agent refused to comply with his request. He said that when
the excitement was over he would have the guilty parties arrested, but
that he feared a general uprising among the Indians if he took any
immediate steps.

The sheriff was extremely angry with the agent, and hot words followed.
The Indians, getting an idea of what was happening, thought the agent
was protecting them against the law, and rode round the sheriff in a
circle and defied him.

After they had been riding a few minutes, they made a much wider circle,
so that they were out of his reach, and one of the number called out
that he had shot the herder, and defied the sheriff to capture him.

This Indian was a young man named Badger, who had been sent to Carlisle
and educated, and from whom good things had been expected--but, like
many of the Indians who are sent away to be educated, he had fallen back
into his old habits on his return to the reservation, and in blanket and
war-paint was as much a savage as if he had never been taught the
blessings of civilization.

The sheriff made fresh demands for the guilty men, and finally Badger
was arrested. In the mean while it was found that several other
Cheyennes had taken part in the murder, and the sheriff demanded that
they also should be handed over to justice.

This the Indians would not agree to. They said that one white man had
been killed, and one Indian had been given up for him. They could not be
made to see that all the guilty men should be punished. They thought it
unreasonable to ask for four or five Indians in exchange for but one
white man.

When the sheriff insisted they got very ugly, and finally two hundred of
them left the reservation and went on the war-path.

It has been reported that the Cheyennes sent messages to the Sioux,
asking them to join the war party, but the Sioux declined.

Some trouble is feared, but nothing of a very serious nature.

The settlers will not return to their homes till White Bull is caught,
and though the commanders at the forts are trying to assure them that
there is no danger, they prefer to keep their women and children in
safety until White Bull has been captured and the band dispersed.

Round-ups are suspended, sheep-shearing has ceased, and everybody is
armed for war.

       *       *       *       *       *

Word has just reached us that the American sailors who were imprisoned
for nearly two years in Siberia were safely landed in San Francisco on
the 4th of June.

After the Russians had succeeded in deceiving the American naval
officers, as we told you on page 361 of THE GREAT ROUND WORLD, the
sailors gave themselves up for lost.

Their friends in California, however, appealed to our Minister in
Russia, and on the 20th of last March an order for their release was
sent to the prison.

The sailors lost no time in leaving Siberia, and making their way home
to their own country.

       *       *       *       *       *

Southern California has just been celebrating its annual flower
festival. These occasions are so interesting that you would probably
like to hear about them.

The flowers of California are beautiful beyond description, and grow in
masses that would astonish Eastern eyes. Roses, lilies, daisies,
poppies, grow on every side--the cultivated garden flowers growing in
the same profusion that our wild flowers do.

The Californians are naturally very proud of their flowers, and when
President Harrison was making his trip to the West in 1891, the people
of the State very sensibly concluded that in his progress from the East
he had seen every kind of flag decoration that the mind could suggest,
but that flowers such as they could show him would be a novelty to him.

The people of Santa Barbara therefore decided to hold a flower carnival
in their city as a welcome to the President when he visited them.

Arches forty feet high were stretched across the principal streets, and
decorated with flowers of all kinds. Some were all of roses, some of
palms and pampas grass, some of wild flowers, and some of the wonderful
yellow Californian poppy. From these arches hung festoons of
marguerites, wistaria, orange and lemon blossoms, the streets being
canopied with flowers.

The festivities were all of a floral character, winding up with a flower
dance, in which forty-eight young ladies of the city took part, each
representing a different flower. Their dresses were fashioned and
colored like the flowers they represented, and were covered with bunches
of the real flowers.

After the young girls had danced for a few moments a number of young men
dressed as bees joined the dance, and a few moments later a score of
little children as butterflies.

This first carnival was such a success that it was decided to repeat it
and make it an annual affair.

Since then, not only Santa Barbara, but a number of other Californian
towns have held their annual flower festival.

People from the East are now making excursions to the Pacific Coast on
purpose to see the charming sight.

The carnival season that has just passed has been more beautiful than
usual, the favorable weather bringing the flowers out in great splendor.

In Los Angeles they had a parade of carriages decorated with flowers, a
prize being given for the most tastefully decked vehicle.

The prize winner was a basket phaeton covered with pink carnations, and
canopied with the blue Californian daisies.

Four white horses with harnesses of pink carnations, and collars and
head-pieces of blue daisies, were attached to the carriage, and seated
in it were two young ladies dressed in the same colors as the flowers.

No trouble is spared in decorating the carriages, and that no speck of
any but the chosen colors may be seen, the entire carriage is first
covered with cheese-cloth of the required shade, and the harness and
whip wound with ribbons of the same color. The flowers are then fastened
on the cloth, and the carriage, wheels and all, looks like a bower of
blossoms.

When you think that this was but one of the exhibits in the parade, you
can form some idea of the bounteous way flowers grow in Southern
California.

       *       *       *       *       *

An attempt is to be made to climb Mount St. Elias, the snow-clad
mountain in Alaska, which makes the boundary line between Alaska and
British Columbia.

[Illustration]

Mount St. Elias is about 18,000 feet high, and was supposed to be the
highest peak on the continent till Mount Logan was discovered a few
miles farther inland, that was found to be 1,500 feet higher.

The slopes of Mount St. Elias are covered with glaciers, and so far
about 4,000 feet of the mountain have defied the efforts of all
mountaineers.

Two parties will make the attempt this summer, one composed of American
scientists, and the other of Prince Luigi of Savoy, who is a nephew of
King Humbert of Italy, and some companions.

The first attempt to explore the mountain was made eleven years ago, but
only an altitude of 7,200 feet was reached. Two years later an
Englishman made another effort, and had climbed 11,000 feet of the
mountain before he was obliged to descend.

In 1891 a party succeeded in reaching a height of 14,500 feet. Halting
on this spot to rest before they ventured farther, the weather changed,
clouds gathered over them, avalanches began to sweep down the
mountain-sides, and the adventurers had to hurry to the base of the
mountain.

Young Prince Luigi, who will make this present attempt, is most anxious
to reach the top of Mount St. Elias. He will have many hardships to
endure before he can hope to reach his goal. His party will have to
cross the glaciers and ice-clad mountains which lie in his path, and
will have to camp many days on the ice, a cold and comfortless
proceeding.

The Prince declares he has only come for the sport, but his trip may be
of great value to the world, for he has in his party a gentleman who is
famous for his wonderful mountain photographs.

Signor Sella, as he is called, is taking a complete photographic outfit
with him, and if the conditions are favorable, will bring us back some
mountain pictures that will add greatly to our knowledge of the
beautiful Mount St. Elias.

                                         GENIE H. ROSENFELD.




INVENTION AND DISCOVERY.


DIAL CALENDAR.--This is a calendar which combines many good points. It
is not only a monthly calendar, but weekly and daily as well. By means
of two movable discs the calendar for the week appears in an opening cut
in the frame just above the monthly calendar, and lest even then a
person should be mystified about the date a broad black band can be
shifted daily to mark the actual day. The calendar would appear to be an
ideal one if only its owners remember to set it, but the trouble with
the shifting calendars is that so few people remember to adjust them.

[Illustration]

COMBINATION COT AND STEP-LADDER.--We have had lots of clever inventions
for saving room in small houses, but the most original is certainly this
combination of a bed and a step-ladder. It should prove a very useful
article where the occupant of the bed is a light sleeper and doesn't
mind having to get up when the step-ladder is needed. It might also be
useful in very large families where chairs were scarce. By day it could
be stood upright, and the children roosted on its various steps. By
night the little brood could come down from their perches, the steps be
laid lengthwise, and the family put to bed on the cot.

With the addition of a strong wire spring attached to an alarm clock, it
should also make an excellent servants' bed.

[Illustration]

At 6:30 every morning the alarm would work the spring, and the bed
immediately be transformed into a pair of steps. This would promote
habits of punctuality and early rising in domestic servants that would
be invaluable to them.

It is true that they might resent the invention, and leave the
situation, but the mistress would still have the combination bed for the
newcomer.

It would be an invaluable article for house decorators and
paper-hangers. They could use it as a step-ladder until they got tired
of working, and then turn it over and sleep on it until they were
rested.

In fact, the uses of this combination cot and step-ladder are infinite.
It seems to be an article that no well-regulated family can do without.


       *       *       *       *       *


     "The Great Round World" PRIZE CONTEST


THE GREAT ROUND WORLD is now over six months old, and it feels some
anxiety to know just how much interest its readers have taken in the
news and how much information they have gained from its pages. To
ascertain this, it has been decided to offer ten prizes for the best
answers to the following:

     =Name ten of the most important events that have been mentioned in
     "The Great Round World" in the first 30 numbers, that is, up to
     number of June 3d.=

     _In mentioning these events give briefly reasons for considering
     them important._

This competition will be open to subscribers only, and any one desiring
to enter the competition must send to this office their name and the
date of their subscription; a number will then be given them.

All new subscribers will be furnished with a card entitling them to
enter the competition.

In making the selection of important events, remember that wars and
political events are not necessarily the most important. If, for
instance, the air-ship had turned out to be a genuine and successful
thing, it would have been most important as affecting the history of the
world. Or if by chance the telephone or telegraph had been invented in
this period, these inventions would have been _important_ events.

Prizes will be awarded to those who make the best selection and who
mention the events in the best order of their importance. Answers may be
sent in any time before September 1st.

THE GREAT ROUND WORLD does not want you to hurry over this contest, but
to take plenty of time and do the work carefully. It will be a pleasant
occupation for the summer months.

We would advise you to take the magazines starting at No. 1, look them
over carefully, keep a note-book at your side, and jot down in it the
events that seem to you important; when you have finished them all, No.
1 to 30, look over your notes and select the ten events that seem to you
to be the most important, stating after each event your reason for
thinking it important.

For instance: suppose you decide that the death of Dr. Ruiz was one of
these important events, you might say, "The killing of Dr. Ruiz in the
prison of Guanabacoa--because it brought the cruelties practised on
American citizens to the attention of our Government," etc., etc.

In sending your answers put your number and the date only on them, for
the judges are not to know names and addresses of the contestants, that
there may be no favoritism shown.

It is important to put date on, for if two or more are found of similiar
standing, the one first received will be given preference.

Address all letters to REVIEW PRIZE CONTEST DEPARTMENT, GREAT ROUND
WORLD, 3 and 5 West 18th Street, New York City.

     _Write answer on one side of the paper only_

     =Prizes will be selections from the premium catalogue=


     No. 1. Premiums as given for 15 Subscriptions

     No. 2.    "      "   "    "  12        "

     No. 3.    "      "   "    "  10        "

     No. 4.    "      "   "    "   9        "

     No. 5.    "      "   "    "   8        "

     No. 6.    "      "   "    "   7        "

     No. 7     "      "   "    "   5        "

     No. 8.    "      "   "    "   5        "

     No. 9.    "      "   "    "   5        "

     No. 10.   "      "   "    "   5        "


       *       *       *       *       *

THE GREAT ROUND WORLD
NATURAL HISTORY
STORIES.

A Series of True Stories

BY
JULIA TRUITT BISHOP.

Attractively Illustrated by Barnes.

       *       *       *       *       *

These stories will be issued in parts. Price, 10 cents each. Subscription
price (12 numbers), $1.00. Part 1. issued as supplement to GREAT ROUND
WORLD NO. 20.

       *       *       *       *       *

    =Author's Preface.=

    The stories published in this little volume have been issued
    from time to time in the Philadelphia _Times_, and it is at the
    request of many readers that they now greet the world in more
    enduring form. They have been written as occasion suggested,
    during several years; and they commemorate to me many of the
    friends I have known and loved in the animal world. "Shep" and
    "Dr. Jim," "Abdallah" and "Brownie," "Little Dryad" and
    "Peek-a-Boo." I have been fast friends with every one, and have
    watched them with such loving interest that I knew all their
    ways and could almost read their thoughts. I send them on to
    other lovers of dumb animals, hoping that the stories of these
    friends of mine will carry pleasure to young and old.

       *       *       *       *       *

    =WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON,=
    =3 & 5 West 18th Street.=

       *       *       *       *       *


     _Subscribers going out of town will please notify us as early as
     possible of proposed change of address, in order to save delay in
     receipt of magazines_

     _THE GREAT ROUND WORLD_

       *       *       *       *       *

=S.T.A. Vertical Writing Pens=

[Illustration]

     =PRICES:=

     =Per Gross, $1.00; Per Dozen= (samples), =10 Cents=

Vertical writing demands a commercial pen. The "S.T.A." pens are strictly
a commercial pen, made after the famous models designed by John Jackson,
originator of the

    -------_System of Upright Writing._------

The desirability of teaching children, boys especially, to write with such
a pen as they will use in after life will be recognized by every good
teacher.

     _Introduced into the Schools of Denver, Colo., and elsewhere._

       *       *       *       *       *

=LIBRARIANS=

will please note that the subscription price of THE GREAT ROUND WORLD--to
libraries--is $1.75 per year.


       *       *       *       *       *

  A Good Agent
    Wanted
  In Every Town
              for
    "The Great Round World"

       *       *       *       *       *

=PREMIUM LIST=

    In connection with our offer of any BICYCLE you wish for 100 new
    subscriptions, we have prepared a

=Premium Catalogue=

    This contains a list of selected articles which will be given to
    those who may obtain a smaller number of subscriptions

       *       *       *       *       *

Those who fail to secure the necessary number for the bicycle may make
selection from this catalogue.


       *       *       *       *       *

    =Copy mailed on receipt of 5c.=

       *       *       *       *       *

    =THE GREAT ROUND WORLD=
    =3 & 5 West 18th St, New York City=






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is
Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 33, June 24, 1897, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD ***

***** This file should be named 15740.txt or 15740.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/5/7/4/15740/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.(www.pgdp.net)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

