The Project Gutenberg eBook, Practical Rules for the Management of a
Locomotive Engine, by Charles Hutton Gregory


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Practical Rules for the Management of a Locomotive Engine
       in the Station, on the Road, and in cases of Accident


Author: Charles Hutton Gregory



Release Date: August 28, 2006  [eBook #19133]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRACTICAL RULES FOR THE MANAGEMENT
OF A LOCOMOTIVE ENGINE***





Transcribed from the 1841 edition by David Price, ccx074@pglaf.org





PRACTICAL RULES FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF A LOCOMOTIVE ENGINE:
IN THE STATION, ON THE ROAD, AND IN CASES OF ACCIDENT.


                                    BY
                         CHARLES HUTTON GREGORY,
                             CIVIL ENGINEER.




PREFACE.


The substance of the following pages was written several months since,
and subsequently sent to the Institution of Civil Engineers, where it was
read in abstract on the 16th of February in the present session.

While our Engineering Literature contains several valuable Treatises on
the Theory and Construction of the Locomotive Engine, it has, as yet,
produced no work illustrating its Use.  This circumstance, added to the
recommendation of several competent authorities, has induced the writer
to apply to the Council of the Institution of Civil Engineers for
permission to lay before the public these Practical Rules for the
Management of a Locomotive Engine, drawn up from individual experience,
in the hope that they may be acceptable, at a period when any subject
connected with the efficiency and safety of Railway travelling is
deservedly engaging attention.

At the end of the Paper will be found some Regulations for the first
appointment of Engine-men, adopted by the Directors of the London and
Croydon Railway, and framed by the writer in his official capacity as
their Resident Engineer.  Also, a Table of Railway Velocities, indicated
by the time occupied in passing over given distances, which he has
frequently found to save him the trouble of calculation, and which he
hopes may be similarly useful to others.

                                                   CHARLES HUTTON GREGORY.

London, March, 1841.




PRACTICAL RULES, &c.


THE MANAGEMENT OF A LOCOMOTIVE ENGINE IN THE STATION.


The careful examination of a Locomotive Engine when in the Station, and
its judicious management while running, are essential to the full
performance of its duty, and to ensure the safety of the passengers by
the train.

While an Engine is stopping at the Station before a trip, the fire should
be properly kept up,--the tubes clear at both ends,--and the fire-bars
picked free from clinkers: the regulator should be closed and
locked,--the tender-break screwed down tight,--the reversing-lever fixed
in the middle position, so that the slides may be out of gear,--the cocks
of the oil-vessels and feed-pipes turned off,--and the steam blowing off
from the safety-valve at a pressure of 35 lbs. per square inch; if
blowing off in any excess, the waste steam may be turned into the
Tender-cistern to heat the water, and the door of the smoke-box may be
opened to check the fire, but it should be fastened up again 10 or 15
minutes before the time of starting.

Before an Engine starts with a train, the attention of the Engine-man
should first be directed to its being in complete working order; with
this view he should go beneath the Engine, and carefully examine the
working gear in detail.

The connecting-rod is a very important part, and more liable perhaps than
any other to fail for want of proper examination.  The cotters must be
secure, and in case the brasses have too much play they must be tightened
up; observing, however, that brasses should never be set so hard as to
cause friction.  If there are set-screws at the side of the cotters, they
should be tight, and all cotters should have a split-pin at the bottom
for greater security.  The cotters which fasten the piston-rods to the
cross-heads should be firm in their place, as well as the set-screws,
keys, or other connections, by which the feed-pump pistons are secured to
the piston-rod.

The brasses of the inner framing which carry the inside bearings of the
cranked axle must be examined, and any considerable play prevented by
screwing them up if necessary.  The wheels ought to be accurately square
and firm on their axles, and the keys driven up tight.  All the pins,
bolts, &c., by which the slide-valve gear is connected, the
lifting-links, and the slings of the slide-spindles, must be secure in
their proper places; the spanners ought to be fast on the lifting and
weigh-bars, and the studs on the spanners of the weigh-bars should be
particularly noticed, as, if loose, they may be shaken off on the road
and cause the stoppage of the Engine.  A similar examination must be
extended to the hand-gear, if there be any; and the bolts which fasten
the plummer-blocks of the weigh-bars, &c., must be screwed up if they are
loose.

The straps of the eccentrics should work with sufficient freedom, and the
eccentrics must be firm in their right position on the axle, or the
Engine will beat unevenly: if any escape of steam has been observed in
the stuffing-boxes of the piston-rod and slide-valve spindle, or of water
from the joints of the feed-pumps and suction-pipes, they must be screwed
up; and any dirt that may have collected near any of the bearings or
connections must be carefully wiped off with cotton waste.

The inspection beneath the Engine being complete, the Engine-man should
examine the ends of the tubes of the boiler, and if there should be
leakage to any serious extent, it would be prudent to drive in a plug at
each end of the defective tube.  A small quantity of Russian tallow
should occasionally be introduced into the steam-chests and cylinders, to
grease the slides and pistons.  This is done, either by cocks on the
outside of the smoke-box or in the cylinder covers, or through holes
secured by plugs, in the steam-chest covers.  The ashes should be emptied
out of the smoke-box, and the small ash-door carefully secured.

Occasionally the gauge should be applied to the wheels, and the Engine
should never be allowed to run when they are found to be at all incorrect
or out of the square.

If there are oil-vessels at the side of the Engine with pipes to the
pistons, bearings, &c., the Engine-man must see that they are filled, and
the cotton wicks in the top of the pipes, and hanging over into the oil;
that the grease-boxes of the axle-bearings are filled; and the pins,
links, &c., of the springs right and sound.  The draw-bar connecting the
Engine and Tender must be secure, and the safety-chains attached.

The Tender must be replenished with coke and water.  An Engine-man should
never run with an Engine without knowing what stock of both the Tender
will carry.  It is impossible to lay down any general rule for the
quantity of water evaporated and the coke consumed per mile with the same
Engine, as the amount depends entirely on the extent of duty performed.
The stock of coke is usually nearly twice as much as that of water,--the
water which most Tenders contain is ordinarily sufficient for running 30
miles with certainty; but when the gradients are steep, the load heavy,
and stoppages frequent, additional water may be oftener required; and on
the other hand, with light duty, an Engine may sometimes run further
without any stoppage.  The inconvenience attached to the necessity of
frequent stoppages, and the expense of maintaining a large number of coke
and water stations, have lately induced the manufacture of a larger class
of Tender on six wheels, which, from superior capacity, will admit of a
much longer run.

After a little practice, the examination described above occupies a very
short time: it ought to be completed, and the Engine in its position at
the head of the train, at least five minutes before the hour of starting,
when oil must be copiously supplied by the small oiling-can, to the
oil-cups of the guides, connecting-rods, &c., and to all rubbing parts
not fed by the oiling-pipes; the cocks of the large oil-vessels must be
opened, and the safety-valve screwed down to the working pressure, say 45
lbs. per square inch.

It would ensure a careful inspection, if, before any train starts, the
Engine-man were required to deliver to the Superintendent of the Station
a certificate that he has examined his Engine, and finds it in good
working order.

Several articles should be constantly carried on the Tender, as either
being frequently required in the working of the Engine, or occasionally
in cases of derangement or accident.  The following may be taken as a
list:

One large can of oil, and one or two small oiling-cans and an
oiling-tube, a box of Russian tallow, a quantity of cotton waste, hemp,
and gasken, a hand-brush, keys fitted to all the principal bolts, one
large and one small monkey-wrench, rods for clearing the tubes and fire,
an arrow-headed poker, a shovel, and a rake.

A number of iron or wooden plugs, an iron plug-holder, and a 7 lb. maul,
two cold chisels, a hammer and a file, spare washers, and duplicates of
the principal bolts, nuts, pins, cotters, &c., a quantity of thick and
thin cord, and some tarred line, a fire-bucket, two long crow-bars, a
spare coupling-chain, with shackle and hook complete, several wooden
wedges, about 2 feet long, 4 or 5 inches wide and 3 inches thick, and, if
running long journeys, two spare ball-clacks, and a screw-jack.



THE MANAGEMENT OF A LOCOMOTIVE ENGINE ON THE ROAD.


In the management of a Locomotive Engine, many unforeseen circumstances
may occur, requiring the use of that discretion which experience alone
can confer, and which it would be almost impossible to comprise in the
particular instructions contained in the following pages, which, however,
the writer believes to contain all the leading principles of
Engine-driving.

On receiving the signal to start, the Engine-man should only slightly
open the regulator, and let the train run for several yards, before he
opens it, by slow degrees, to the full extent.  The object of thus giving
a slight aperture to the regulator in starting, is to avoid any jerk to
the carriages, by which passengers might be annoyed, or even the
coupling-irons broken; to prevent the slipping of the driving-wheels,
from their adhesion being unequal to the inertia of the train, when the
full power of the Engine is suddenly used; and because fully opening the
regulator at starting generally causes the Engine to _prime_
considerably, from the quantity of water condensed in the cylinders and
steam-passages while the Engine was standing.  When _priming_ occurs at
starting, the discharge-cocks of the cylinders should be opened to remove
the water.  On leaving the station, and frequently on the road, the
Engine-man should watch the train behind him, to see that it is all right
and its motion regular.

The Engine-man should now be standing on the foot-board of the Engine,
which he ought never to leave, unless the machinery is out of order, when
he may leave the Stoker in his place; he should as much as possible be in
such a position as to command, without moving from his place, the
reversing-lever, the whistle, and the regulator, these being the parts
which he is most frequently obliged to use at the shortest notice; his
hand should be upon the regulator, which, when he has arrived at a good
speed, he will gradually ease off, so as to economise steam without
retarding the train: his eye should be constantly directed to the rails
in front of him, that he may be immediately aware of any obstruction, and
at the same time his full attention must be given to the maintaining a
sufficiency of steam at an equable pressure; this is to be done by using
the requisite care in the manner and time of supplying _water_ and
_fuel_.

Water is supplied by opening the cocks in the feed-pipes, which allow the
pumps to act; and the height of water in the boiler is commonly shown by
a glass gauge-tube, and by three gauge-cocks at the side, which should be
opened from time to time, (especially when stopping,) as they afford a
more correct indication of the quantity of water and steam than the
gauge-tube.

One pump, if constantly at work, would, in most Engines, supply as much,
or rather more water than is required by the Engine as equivalent to the
steam consumed; so that by turning on or off either or both pumps, the
Engine-man has the power of regulating the height of the water in the
boiler at discretion.

It may be laid down as an invariable rule, that water alone should always
blow off from the bottom cock (which is from 1 inch to 1.5 inch above the
top of the fire-box), in order that there may be enough water over the
fire-box and tubes to prevent their burning; and few Engines will carry
their water much above the top cock without _priming_, so that the height
of the water may be made to range between these two points, according as
more or less steam is required.

The water is higher when the Engine is running than when stopping: a good
working height for it in most Engines is when _water_ blows off from the
middle cock while running, and _water and steam_ when stopping: an
Engine-man is sometimes obliged to run the water rather lower, if he has
heavy work; but it is always better to keep the level of the water as
high as possible.

It is observed that when any variation takes place in the pressure of the
steam, a corresponding change occurs in the level of the water,--that
when the pressure of the steam rises or falls, the height of the water
rises or falls simultaneously.  Partly for this reason, and partly to
allow the more rapid generation of steam, the feed-pumps are not
generally allowed to act when the Engine starts: a knowledge of this fact
also shows the necessity of the water being above the ordinary level,
before a decrease is allowed in the pressure of the steam.

When the Engine is highest on an inclined plane, rather a greater height
of water must be kept over the fire-box than on a level, in order that
the chimney ends of the tubes may be well covered.

The most favourable time for allowing the feed-pumps to act, is when the
steam is blowing off with force from the safety-valve, and the fire
strong; and the least favourable time is when the steam and fire are low:
indeed the Engine-man should manage that it may never be necessary in the
latter case, as the addition of water rapidly lowers the steam.

In order to know the force of the steam, one hand may occasionally lift
or depress for a moment the lever of the safety-valve, according as the
steam is under or over the working pressure; and a little practice will
soon enable a person to judge the extent of excess or deficiency.

Both feed-pumps should not commence working at the same time.

The water should never be allowed to run low before arriving at any part
of the road where considerable power is required, as steam is produced
more rapidly when both pumps are turned off,--a measure which is
imprudent unless the water is high.

When "the feed" is turned on, the Engine-man should try the pet-cock to
see whether the pump is acting freely: the water thrown from it should be
in forcible intermittent jets; warm water with a little steam will
frequently escape from it at first; if this should continue, it may be
concluded that the upper clack does not act; and if the water is in a
continuous stream without pulsations, the lower clack is out of order.
In either case it will not be prudent to trust too much to the faulty
pump, but the evil may frequently be remedied by working the pump a short
time with the pet-cock open, or alternately turned on and off.

Coke is put on the fire by the Stoker, at the order of the Engine-man,
who should hold the chain of the fire-door in his hand, and open it for
as short a time as possible, while the Stoker throws on each shovelful of
coke: the shovel should be well filled, and the coke distributed equally
over the fire.

In most Engines, the fuel need not be higher than the bottom of the
fire-door; and if allowed to fall more than 6 or 8 inches below it, it
must not be expected that the pressure of the steam will be maintained,
if the Engine has a load.

The supply of fuel should be regular, and so arranged that the fire may
have burned up well by the time the steam is most required.  As the
addition of fuel causes a temporary reduction of the force of the fire,
coke should not be laid on immediately before arriving at an inclined
plane or any part of the road where much power is required; but when
ascending an incline, coke should be gradually added when the Engine
begins to _beat heavily_,--the draught is then powerful, and a regular
supply of fuel required to keep up the fire.

In other circumstances, provided the fire is low enough to require fuel,
the best time to put on coke is when the water is sufficiently high to
turn off the feed-pumps, the steam slightly blowing off, and the Engine
travelling at a good speed.

No definite instructions can be given for the frequency with which coke
must be laid on the fire, as it varies according to the duty to be done,
and the water consequently to be evaporated: in cases of heavy duty and
bad gradients, it may at times be necessary even at as short an interval
as 2 miles; under contrary circumstances an Engine may sometimes run as
much as 15 miles without adding fresh coke.

The fire should be allowed to run rather low before arriving at the top
of an inclined plane down which the steam will not be used: on beginning
to descend the plane, fuel should be put on the fire, which will burn up
by the time the train reaches the bottom of the plane.

If it is wished to keep up the steam, it is better not to supply water
and fuel at the same time.

While running, the Stoker should occasionally pick the ashes from the
tubes to clear the draught.

By observing the above rules for the supply of water and coke, an
efficient pressure and quantity of steam will be produced, which it must
be the study of the Engine-man to economise.  With this view the
regulator should never be kept too far open;--as soon as the train has
acquired the velocity wished, the aperture may be considerably reduced
without diminishing the speed.  As any diminution in the amount of steam
used causes a corresponding diminution in the quantity of coke consumed,
the skill of the Engine-man should be unceasingly directed to the
reduction of so heavy an item of Railway expenditure.

If there should be, at any time, an unnecessary quantity and force of
steam, it is readily reduced by opening the fire-door, and by turning on
the feed-pumps; if there should be too little, the Engine-man must be
content to run slowly for a short time, keep the regulator only partially
open, and put on a gradual supply of coke.

When the water in the boiler is high, many Engines begin to prime,
especially after running for several days.  When this occurs, the
aperture of the regulator should be diminished, and the fire-door and the
discharge cocks of the cylinders opened: if the height of the water will
allow it, the blow-off cock of the boiler may be opened for a short time
to carry off the sediment, which will be found advantageous.

The Engine-man should frequently look to the working gear, to see that it
is in proper order, and to rectify any deficiency at the next Station.

On nearing a Station where it is intended to stop, the regulator should
be gradually eased off at about five-eighths of a mile from the Station,
so that the train may be more under control, and when from a quarter to
half a mile distant, according to the velocity and weight of the train,
the steam should be completely shut off, and the train brought to rest by
the breaks.  In approaching terminal Stations the steam should be shut
off at a greater distance than at the intermediate Stations, to prevent
the possibility of overrunning the mark from the failure of breaks.  It
must be borne in mind that the breaks act much less efficiently in wet or
frosty weather, when it becomes necessary to shut off the steam further
from the Stations.  The use of the reversing-lever ought, as much as
possible, to be avoided: it may sometimes be placed in the middle
position (in which the valves do not act), but it should never be
completely reversed unless absolutely necessary for the stoppage of the
train.

At the intermediate Stations, the Stoker should frequently oil all the
bearings not supplied by the large oil-vessels, and fill the oil-cups of
the connecting-rods, slides, &c., and if any of the bearings, brasses,
&c., are hot, they should be more copiously oiled, and eased if
necessary.  He should also examine all the working gear cursorily to see
if it is in a complete state; particular attention should be given to the
axle-bearings, and especially those of the cranked axle, which sometimes
become so hot by running as to require cooling by throwing on water.

In case of the driving wheels slipping much in starting from a Station,
the opening of the regulator should be reduced, and only gradually opened
as the wheel bites; the Stoker is sometimes obliged to scatter ashes,
sand, &c., before the wheels: some Engines are now furnished with hoppers
in front, opened by a handle from the foot-board, by means of which sand
may be dropped on the rails in front of the driving wheels.

If slipping is observed to an unusual extent, it may be inferred that
there is not sufficient weight on the driving wheels, and the springs
ought to be tightened by screwing up the nuts of the bearing bolts: or
where the framing is hung to the springs by plain links, the spring pins
must be lengthened the next time the Engine is in the repairing shops.  A
deficiency of weight on the front or hind wheels is indicated by the
pitching of the Engine, and should be remedied in a similar manner.

The regulator should be gradually and completely closed, when the Engine
or train pitches or rocks violently,--in passing a series of points and
crossings,--in very sharp curves, especially if double,--in rough parts
of the permanent way,--and in descending planes whose inclination is
sufficient to carry the train down, without steam, at a velocity of 30
miles per hour.  In descending such an inclined plane, if it should be
found that the velocity is greater than 30 miles per hour, it should be
reduced by gently applying the break.

On every Railway there is a prescribed limit to the pressure of the
steam, and no circumstance should induce the Engine-man to use steam at a
higher pressure, or in any case to weight the lever, or hold it down for
more than a moment.  When there are two safety-valves, that which is out
of reach may be set at the limit of pressure, and the valve next the
foot-board some pounds lower.  It is an advantage to have a stop placed
below the lever of the safety-valve on the screw of the spring balance,
to prevent its being inadvertently screwed down to more than the working
pressure.

The steam whistle is obviously intended to give notice of danger: on this
account its use is forbidden on some Railways, excepting on occasions of
extreme emergency; but the variety of modulation of which it is
susceptible has in others induced its adoption as a frequent warning.
When the latter is the case, it has been found a safe measure to sound
the whistle directly the steam has been shut off previously to stopping
at a Station, and to give two short whistles the moment before starting,
to warn parties of the approach and departure of the train.  When this
system is practised, the Engine-man should not turn on the full power of
the whistle, but reserve it exclusively for cases of danger.

When near the end of the trip very little fire is wanted, and both
feed-pumps should be turned on for a short distance before arriving at
the Station, unless the Engine is to start again immediately.  If it is
intended to remain at the Station about an hour, the water should be
considerably above the middle cock (when the Engine is standing), which
will be effected by keeping on both feed-pumps from a half to
three-quarters of a mile.  The safety-valve should, at the same time, be
eased off to 35 lbs.

If the train is brought into the Station by a tow-rope, great care must
be taken to stretch the rope gradually by a gentle advance of the Engine,
which must be stopped at a signal from the tow-rope man.

It would be prudent to conduct the examination described at the
commencement, directly the Engine arrives at the Station, in order to
leave time for any repair which may be required.

When an Engine is running the last trip for the day, no fuel need be put
on for the last 10, 15, or 20 miles, according as the duty is heavy or
light; indeed, the fire may be nearly run out by the time the Engine
stops, if the gradients, &c., are favourable.  For a considerable
distance before stopping both pumps should be at work, so that the water
in the boiler may be at or above the top cock when the Engine stops, and
the safety-valve should be eased off to 25 lbs. per square inch.

On stopping over the pit, the fire is drawn by opening the fire-door,
introducing the arrow-headed poker through the fire-bars, and pulling up
two or three of them from the bottom of the furnace, by which room will
be allowed for the rest to be separated, and the fire fall through into
the ash-pan, from which it is raked out by the Stoker.  The practice of
blowing off all the water from a boiler by the pressure of the steam
should never be allowed, without an express order from the Superintendent
of Locomotives, when the boiler is unusually full of mud; as, if
frequently practised, it will seriously injure the fire-box and tubes.



THE MANAGEMENT OF A LOCOMOTIVE ENGINE IN CASES OF ACCIDENT.


An Engine is liable to several accidents while running, and it is
important that the Engine-man should know how to act promptly under the
circumstances.  In the following list several cases are enumerated, with
the particular steps to be taken in each.

1.  _The bursting of a tube_.--The Engine-man should stop the Engine, and
drive a plug into each end of the tube.  It frequently happens that the
water and steam blow out with so much force, that it is impossible even
to discover the defective tube: by running the Engine for a short
distance with both pumps acting, the pressure of the steam will perhaps
be sufficiently reduced to enable the Engine-man to work with safety; but
if the escape of water and steam is still too great to do so, he must run
his Engine and train, if possible, off the main line into a siding, and
draw the fire, to prevent its injuring the fire-box and tubes: when the
water has run out down to the level of the defective tube, it may be
easily plugged, and a fresh fire laid and lighted.  A tube will
frequently leak to a considerable extent without absolutely requiring the
stoppage of the train; but in this case great care is necessary not to
use much steam, or urge the fire too far.

The bursting of a tube or other causes will sometimes lead to the lagging
or casing of the boiler catching fire, which should be extinguished by
throwing on water from the Tender-cistern in a fire-bucket, or from the
water crane at a Station.

2.  _The failing of one of the feed pumps_.--In this case the adequate
supply of water may, with care, be maintained by one pump only.  The
supply of coke must be regular, and not in large quantities; and the
steam must be economised, or the water may run low.  The pump should be
repaired as soon as possible; this may frequently be done in the interval
between two trips.

3.  _The breaking of a spring_.--This is an accident which does not
necessarily involve the stoppage of the train; but as working the Engine
in such a state causes an unequal strain, it should run very gently over
rough parts of the road; and if the derangement is considerable, and
cannot be repaired at the Stations, the Engine should cease running as
soon as possible.

4.  _The breaking of a connecting-rod_, _or its disconnection_ by the
loss of cotters, fracture of the straps, &c.  This accident, or any
disconnection which allows the piston to be driven from end to end of the
cylinder without restraint, causes expensive damage to the cylinders and
covers; and the connecting-rod, if loose, will seriously injure the
smaller gear, or may even throw the Engine off the road.  The Engine
should therefore be instantly stopped, and if possible the connection
restored; if that cannot be done, the connecting-rod must be taken off,
and if on a level or a descending gradient, the train may sometimes be
drawn by a single cylinder: to do so, the slide-valve spindle of the
defective cylinder must be detached from the valve gear, by unscrewing
the nuts, and setting the slide at the middle of its stroke so as to
cover both ports.

If it should be found impracticable to move the train, the Engine might
run on alone for assistance; but in any case where the Engine is obliged
to remain stationary, the fire must be drawn directly the water is down
to the bottom cock.

5.  _The fracture or disconnection of the eccentrics, or any of the
slide-valve gear_.--In Engines without hand-gear, if the connection
cannot be restored, the attempt may be made, as in the previous instance,
to work with one cylinder.  When the slide-valve gear is disabled,
Engines with hand-gear possess an advantage which others want, in being
able to be worked by hand, when a single cylinder would be unequal to the
duty, from not being able to move the crank over the centres at starting.

6.  _The fracture of the strap which holds the slide-valve_, renders
unavailable the cylinder on that side where it occurs, without affecting
the other side.  The slide should be detached and placed in the middle of
its stroke, and the attempt made to work with one cylinder.

7.  _The disconnection of a piston_, by the fracture of either cotter, is
sometimes caused by shutting off the steam too suddenly when the Engine
is travelling fast with a heavy load.  In this case also the slide should
be detached and set in the middle position, and the piston-rod uncoupled
from the connecting-rod, which should be removed to prevent its damaging
the small gear.

8.  _The breaking of an axle_, in a four-wheeled Engine is an accident
which is almost of necessity attended with the overturn of the Engine.
In a six-wheeled Engine it requires the stoppage of the train until
assistance arrives.

9.  _The Engine running off the rails_.  With an Engine-man who drives
carefully, watching well the position of the switches, and the signals
given him, and stopping when he sees any danger attending his further
course, this is an accident of very rare occurrence.  If the Engine
should run off on hard ground and near the rails, it may sometimes be
lifted on again at once, by screw-jacks, crow-bars, and long sways; but
if on soft ground or far from the rails, the fire must be drawn, and
instant attention given to prevent its sinking deep into the ground.

The Engine should first be separated from the Tender, which, being a
lighter weight, may be pushed out of the way, and leave more room for
operating on the Engine; this, if it has fallen over on its side, should
be lifted as quickly as may be into a vertical position; to do so, a
purchase should be obtained under the framing on the lowest side, in two
places if possible; two long and tough sways should be brought to bear on
these points, and several men placed to weigh upon each; and as the
Engine is gradually lifted by the sways, every movement should be
followed up and supported by screw-jacks bedded on timber blocking.  When
the Engine has been lifted upright, it should be firmly supported by
timbers placed as stanchions under the framing; the earth may then be
cautiously removed from under the wheels, and a length of rail
introduced, taking care to bed it as securely as possible on the
blockings previously laid down, without disturbing them: the same process
should be repeated on the other side, and cross sleepers driven in under
both rails to secure the foundation.  As soon as the Engine is in a
vertical position and rails inserted under the wheels, a temporary
railway may be laid down in continuation, and the Engine again drawn on
the main line.  It will much facilitate the raising of the Engine if the
water is drawn away out of the boiler as soon as it is sufficiently cool.

                                * * * * *

In all cases of accident involving stoppage on the main line, it is of
the highest importance that some person should immediately be sent back
about three-quarters of a mile along the road, to give the proper signal
of obstruction, and prevent any following train from running in
unexpectedly.

                                * * * * *

The most essential personal qualifications of an Engine-man are, sobriety
and steadiness, activity, presence of mind, and unceasing watchfulness;
and wherever these are combined with an accurate knowledge of the
construction of a Locomotive Engine and the principles of its management,
they tend in no small degree towards rendering Railways, what they
properly are, the safest as well as the most agreeable mode of
travelling.



REGULATIONS FOR THE FIRST APPOINTMENT OF AN ENGINE-MAN, ADOPTED BY THE
DIRECTORS OF THE LONDON AND CROYDON RAILWAY.


1840.

1.  The candidate must not be under twenty-one years of age, and must
produce a certificate of a sound constitution and steady habits.

2.  He must be able to read and write, and, if possible, understand the
rudimental principles of mechanics.

3.  It will be a great recommendation if he has served his time to any
mechanical art, especially as a Fitter of Locomotive Engines; and, if
possible, he should produce testimonials stating his qualifications as
such.

4.  If the candidate has been a Fitter or a stationary Engine-man, he
must, for several months at least, have been a Stoker on a Locomotive
Engine, under the direction of a steady and competent Engine-man; and
before his appointment, he should produce a testimonial from the
Superintendent of Locomotives, or at least from the Engine-man under whom
he has served, stating full confidence in his acquaintance with the
construction of an Engine and the principles of its management.

5.  If the candidate has not been a Fitter or a stationary Engine-man, he
must have served as a Stoker for at least two years, and produce the
testimonials named in the preceding rules.

6.  If required by the Board of Directors, for greater security, the
candidate must undergo an examination from their Engineer, Superintendent
of Locomotives, or other competent person, as to his knowledge of an
Engine and its management, and the general result of this examination
must be committed to paper, signed by the examiner, and presented to the
Board.

7.  The Engineer or Superintendent of Locomotives of the Railway to which
the candidate is desirous of being appointed, shall sign a certificate
stating that he has conversed with him, has seen him drive, and has
confidence in his steadiness and ability.

8.  Before being allowed to take the entire charge of an Engine and
train, the candidate must drive for several days under the direction of
an experienced Engine-man, who must be on his Engine, and certify to his
ability.

9.  All certificates and testimonials must be deposited with the
Secretary of the Company, who will restore them to the owner on his
leaving their service.




A TABLE OF VELOCITIES.




   Time occupied in        Time occupied in              Velocity
 Travelling one eight   Travelling quarter of
      of a mile                 a mile
         7.5                      15                       60.0
          8                       16                       56.2
         8.5                      17                       52.9
          9                       18                       50.0
         9.5                      19                       47.4
          10                      20                       45.0
         10.5                     21                       42.9
          11                      22                       40.9
         11.5                     23                       39.1
          12                      24                       37.5
         12.5                     25                       36.0
          13                      26                       34.6
         13.5                     27                       33.3
          14                      28                       32.1
         14.5                     29                       31.0
          15                      30                       30.0
         15.5                     31                       29.0
          16                      32                       28.1
         16.5                     33                       27.3
          17                      34                       26.5
         17.5                     35                       25.7
          18                      36                       25.0
         18.5                     37                       24.3
          19                      38                       23.7
         19.5                     39                       23.1
          20                      40                       22.5
         20.5                     41                       21.9
          21                      42                       21.4
         21.5                     43                       20.9
          22                      44                       20.4
         22.5                     45                       20.0
          23                      46                       19.6
         23.5                     47                       19.1
          24                      48                       18.7
         24.5                     49                       18.4
          25                      50                       18.0
         25.5                     51                       17.7
          26                      52                       17.3
         26.5                     53                       17.0
          27                      54                       16.7
          28                      56                       16.0
          29                      58                       15.5
          30                      60                       15.0
          31                      62                       14.5
          32                      64                       14.1
          33                      66                       13.6
          34                      68                       13.2
          35                      70                       12.8
          36                      72                       12.5
          37                      74                       12.2
          38                      76                       11.8
          39                      78                       11.5
          40                      80                      11.25
          41                      82                       11.0
          42                      84                       10.7
          43                      86                       10.5
          44                      88                       10.2
          45                      90                       10.0




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRACTICAL RULES FOR THE MANAGEMENT
OF A LOCOMOTIVE ENGINE***


******* This file should be named 19133.txt or 19133.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/9/1/3/19133



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

