Project Gutenberg's Dew Drops, Vol. 37, No. 10, March 8, 1914, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Dew Drops, Vol. 37, No. 10, March 8, 1914

Author: Various

Release Date: November 20, 2004 [EBook #14101]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DEW DROPS, VOL. 37, NO. 10, ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Ronald Holder, John Hagerson, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team.






DEW DROPS

[Illustration]

VOL. 37. No. 10. WEEKLY.

DAVID C. COOK PUBLISHING CO., ELGIN, ILLINOIS.
GEORGE E. COOK. EDITOR.

MARCH 8, 1914.


FRANCIE FISHER'S FISH

[Illustration]

By Marion Mallette Thornton


On the Primary Room wall was a beautiful picture of a shining river.
Francie loved to count the fish that were swimming in it. Just
fourteen there were, and every one stood for a new scholar someone had
brought into the Primary Class.

How Francie wished he could bring one and have Miss Florence pin a
fish in the river and a red tag on his blouse to show that he had
caught it.

"How you s'pose I can get a fish, mother?" he asked earnestly. "I
should think a Fisher-boy ought to be able to catch just one."

Mother shook her head. "I don't know, I'm sure. There isn't a child on
this street who doesn't go to Sunday-school."

"P'r'aps one will move on," said Francie hopefully.

But when a new family did move to that street there were no children
in it.

One day Francie came flying into the house. "Oh. mother, the ash-man's
here and I b'lieve he's got a fish with him!"

"What?" exclaimed mother, but when she looked out she understood.
Sitting in the ash-man's cart was a pretty little boy, with black eyes
and tight curly hair.

"Is he yours. Mr. Lugi?" mother asked, and the ash-man smiled and
nodded:

"Yes. mine--my Rafael."

"Does he go to Sunday-school?" put in Francie eagerly.

"No, no school--too little, him."

"Oh, but it's just Sundays and we sing and there's pictures. Couldn't
he please go with me. Mr. Lugi?" begged Francie, "I'll take awful good
care of him."

Mother explained a little more, and at last Mr. Lugi said Rafael might
go, only--"No dress up, no clothes," he said sadly.

But that did not trouble Francie. "Why, he can have my brown suit,
can't he, mother? I'd just as soon."

The next day mother took Francie down to see Mrs. Lugi. Little Rafael
was shy at first, but he soon got over it and was friendly as could
be. The little black-eyed Italian mother was very glad to see them.

"I like Rafael go the Christ-church," she said. "I use go myself,
home--Italy."

The brown suit, too small for Francie, was just right for Rafael, and
it would have been hard to find two happier little boys than Francie
and his fish when they walked into the Primary class together.

Rafael clapped his hands with the rest when Miss Florence pinned the
fish in the river and the red tag on Francie's blouse.

[Illustration: Miss Florence pinned the fish in the river and the red
tag on Francie's blouse.]

And what do you think? Out in the big room there were two more new
fish, one in Mother Fisher's class and one in Father Fisher's. They
were Mr. Lugi and the little Italian mother, come to Sunday-school
with their little boy.

"Really and truly," Francie said, "seem's if I caught three fish
'stead of one."

"Really and truly," said Mother Fisher, "I think you did."

       *       *       *       *       *

"ALL BY HERSELF."


The older children were gone out for the day: mamma was busy in the
sewing room with Miss Fay: Molly was doing the Saturday baking. "What
could Alice do all by herself?"

This was the very question that popped into the wee girl's own head,
and she trotted off to ask mamma.

"Here's I," she said, at the sewing room door. "Here's I, all by
myself. What's I goin' do, mamma?"

"Going to be mamma's good little daughter and amuse yourself this
morning without help from anybody. See how busy I am."

"Everybody's busy that isn't gone way off," said Alice dolefully.

"Well, then," said mamma. "Alice must be busy, too, taking care of
herself and making her own good times. See how well she can do it.

"But first of all," mamma went on, "think what you would like to do or
to have me get for you, and I'll stop a minute now for that, so as to
start you."

This was an important thing to decide, so Alice went into the next
room and sat down in her kindergarten chair before her table, to think
it out. She folded her arms and sat still about a minute: then she ran
to mamma, exclaiming. "I know now, please get me my snub scissors" (of
course she meant round-pointed) "and some bright paper, and I'll cut
and cut ever so long."

Mamma dropped her work and got the things. "Now, dear," she said, "see
if you can't get along the rest of the morning by yourself. Dolly and
the picture books are in the dining room. Don't ask me for anything if
you can help it, but keep out of mischief and be as happy as you can."

Alice went back to her little table and soon had it covered with queer
things. There were the oddest dolls you ever saw, with arms sticking
out like stems: and there were horses with as many legs as could be
put along the whole length of the body. It was great fun to cut them.

But by and by Alice grew tired of this, and jumped up quickly. Over
went the little table, scattering things everywhere. Such a litter!
"I'll just leave it all," thought Alice. Then a little voice inside
said. "Pick it all up and help mamma." After a minute, the little girl
obeyed this pleasant voice, and picked up every scrap. Then she ran
downstairs without stopping at the sewing room door, though she wanted
to.

"Peggy Morlinda," she said, taking dolly from her cradle, "is you all
by yourself, too? Isn't it lonesome? Come, I'll put you to sleep."

Peggy was soon asleep, or supposed to be, though her eyes were still
staring.

"Now I will go take one little peek at mamma." said Alice, starting
upstairs, but stopping next step. "No. I won't neiver," she said
bravely. "I won't 'sturb mamma one bit."

After this the little girl found amusement for awhile at the library
window. Next, she went back to the picture books, and read a long
story, all made up out of her own head, to Peggy Morlinda, who woke
up to listen. But what a long morning it was! She did not enjoy it
much, but she made up her mind about one thing--she wouldn't "'sturb
mamma."

At last papa came home and Alice ran to him to be tossed up and down,
and they had a fine frolic.

"Have you gotten along nicely with your work?" asked papa of mamma at
dinner.

"Very nicely, thank you," said mamma. "Alice helped me a great deal!"

"Alice!" exclaimed papa, looking as surprised as possible. "Can Alice
sew?"

Mamma laughed. "Oh, no, indeed, not yet," she said, "but she gave me a
fine chance to do it. She amused herself all morning and did not ask
me to do anything for her, so we got on beautifully with the work in
the sewing room."

[Illustration: "Peggy Morlinda, is you all by yourself, too?"]

"Good girl," said papa, and Alice looked as happy as she felt. Oh, how
glad she was that she had not left those scraps of paper for mamma to
pick up! It is always safe to listen to the little inward voice that
says, "Do right."

"Do tell me a story," "What can I play?" "What shall I do next?" the
little folks cry to the grown-ups, and all these things take time to
attend to. If the children who are too small to do any work to "help
mamma," would oftener amuse themselves, as Alice did, they would help
much more than perhaps they think.--_Written for Dew Drops by Mary
Harris_.

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR SKATING RINK.

    The wind blew shrill, the sky was gray:
      "Oh, dear," sighed Molly, "how it rains!
    Let's think of some new game to play,
      I'm getting very tired of trains."

    "I know," said Jack: "it will be fun!"
      And seized some paper, pen and ink;
    "Look, look," cried Susie, "what he's done:
      He's written, 'To the Skating Rink!'"

    The children thought it strange of him
      To pin it up upon the wall;
    "We haven't any skates," said Jim;
      "It isn't any good at all."

    But Jack looked wise. "Oh, yes," said he,
      "I've thought of just the very thing;
    These railway trucks do splendidly--
      We'll tie them on our feet with string."

    They did, and all began to skate.
      But Jack, I fear, was rather rash;
    He _would_ start off at such a rate
      That down he tumbled with a crash!

    He wasn't hurt. "I'm quite all right,"
      He cried, and scrambled up again;
    And on they skated with delight,
      Forgetting all about the rain!
                       --_Selected_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Why Betty Changed Her Mind

By Marie Deacon Hanson

[Illustration]


Each day, on her way to school, Betty called for Robbie Porter. There
were two reasons why she did this. One was that she had promised Mrs.
Porter she would, the other was that the little boy's mother always
gave Betty a cooky, or a piece of candy, or sometimes a penny. Betty
never wanted anyone to know about this second reason, which made her
feel ashamed of herself, whenever she thought of it.

"Just as if you couldn't do a kind thing for your neighbor without
expecting to get something for doing it," she would say scornfully to
herself.

One afternoon, Mrs. Porter met Betty in the grocery, and said to her:
"Deary, shall you mind calling for Robbie about ten minutes earlier in
the morning? I want to go to the city on the eight-thirty train." And
before Betty could answer, she added. "Of course, Robbie could go by
himself now that he has learned the way, but he does so enjoy going
with you."

"And I don't mind one bit calling for him," Betty hastened to assure
Mrs. Porter. "I'll come early in the morning."

On the way home from the store. Betty saw her cousin, Julia Norton,
coming eagerly to meet her.

"Betty," Julia cried, "mother sent me to ask you to stay all night.
Cousin Lottie has come, and mother says we can pop corn and have a
good time. And you must be sure to bring your books so you can go
right to school in the morning from our house."

"That will be lovely," Betty exclaimed delightedly. There were few
treats she enjoyed more than going to her aunt's home.

Julia ran off to speak to another girl, and Betty following, suddenly
remembered Robbie. How could she call for him if she were at her
aunt's?

The latter lived on the other side of the village, and it would be far
out of Betty's way to call for Robbie.

[Illustration: "I'm sorry I can't call for Robbie in the morning."]

"I just won't bother about him," she decided.

But even as she did so, she remembered that she had not only promised
to call for Robbie in the morning, but to call for him earlier than
usual and his mother would depend upon her.

"Oh, dear! What shall I do?" Betty cried impatiently.

A small voice seemed to answer in her ear, and it sounded so real that
Betty actually turned to see if the owner were near: "Do as you would
be done by."

"Why, that's the Golden Rule," Betty quickly exclaimed. "And mother
says if you do as the Golden Rule tells you, you'll never be unhappy.
What does it tell me to do now?" She stood in thought for a moment,
and the next, she ran to overtake her cousin.

"Julia, please give this sugar to mother," Betty said, placing the
bag in her cousin's band. "And tell her that I've gone to Mrs.
Porter's and I'll be right back."

Betty flew down the street to Mrs. Porter's and knocked hurriedly on
the door.

"Why, Betty, what is it, dear?" Mrs. Porter asked in surprise, as the
former rushed into the room, in response to the invitation to enter.

"I'm sorry I can't call for Robbie in the morning. I'm going to Aunt
Fanny's to stay all night," Betty explained breathlessly.

"It is thoughtful of you to come and tell me now, dear," Mrs. Porter
replied. "I'll ask Jennie Lee to stop for Robbie in the morning. I
hope you will have a nice visit at your aunt's."

"I know I shall," Betty answered happily. "I'll call for Robbie the
next day, Mrs. Porter." And away the little girl tripped,
light-hearted as could be. That is the way it makes one feel to follow
the Golden Rule.

       *       *       *       *       *

JACK'S MASTER.


Jack's most delightful present last Christmas was a red wooden gun,
with arrows that would shoot very hard indeed. At least Jack thought
it was delightful, but his mamma did not; those little pointed wooden
arrows that flew so far and hit so hard made her very uneasy, for fear
her little boy would presently hurt somebody.

But mammas hate to spoil their little boys' fun, and Jack's mamma made
an arrangement by which it was agreed that he was to have his gun,
provided that he never pointed it at anybody, even in play.

Jack was quick enough to promise; he meant to keep his promise, too;
and I think would have kept it if it hadn't been for his master. You
didn't know Jack had a master? No more did he know it till the day he
had to give up his gun.

You see, Jack had a little brother, two years younger than himself,
who was a very spirit of mischief, and loved above all things to tease
big Jack. One day, when the two boys were playing together, pretending
to be wild Indians out in the woods. Will began to tease Jack by
saying: "There was a little man, and he had a little gun," and all the
rest of that little song. I don't know why this teased Jack, but he
got madder and madder, until, alas! in spite of his promise, he
pointed his gun--not at the "duck--duck--duck," but at Will, and
struck him on the cheek.

Now it was not the wooden arrow with which his gun was loaded this
time, but one leg of a sharp steel hairpin, and it went into the cheek
and stuck there like a little dagger.

Half an hour later the red gun was in ashes on mamma's hearth, while
mamma herself and both boys sat sorrowfully by its grave.

"Mamma," said Jack, "I didn't mean to shoot Will, but somehow I
couldn't help it."

"No," said mamma, shaking her head: "I forgot when I let you keep the
gun that you had a master."

"A master?" asked Jack, in surprise.

"Yes," said mamma, "you obey Bad Temper's orders, though you don't
always obey mine."

"Mamma," said Jack, presently, "I think I'll leave Bad Temper's
service. He gets me into a heap of trouble."

"Do, Jack," she said, smiling brightly at him. "And while you are
getting rid of a bad master, remember that you have a good one, the
Lord Jesus, on whose banner is written, 'Putting away all wrath and
clamor.'"

Little Will listened very soberly to all this, with a red hole in his
cheek, and both chubby hands resting on his bare knees. I hope he made
up his mind, too, to choose the good Master.--_Selected_.

       *       *       *       *       *

WHAT MAKES MEN?

    What care I for cold or snow?
    School bell rings, and off I go!
    I am ready for the storm,
      And my heart is light and gay;
    Mother's hand has wrapped me warm,
      As I trudge along the way.

    Mother says, "Learn all you can,
    Then you'll be a better man."
    So I pack my books and go.
    Through the rain or wind or snow;
    For I hope some day to be
    Just the man she'd like to see.

    Well I know that boys must learn
    To be ready for each turn,
    Never idle nor afraid.
    By rough struggles men are made.
    So each morning, off I start.
    With a merry, willing heart.
                       --_Selected_.


       *       *       *       *       *

LUCILE'S SURPRISE.


It was a bitter cold day in January, so cold that the children ran all
the way to school. It was snowing, too, and blowing as hard as it
could. A very small crowd was in the classroom that morning, and
everyone began to wonder why.

"Not on account of the cold, surely," declared Edith Watts. "Why, it's
just fine to be out to-day. And I know Lucile would never stay away
because it was cold. She has too much spunk for that."

But still Lucile didn't come, and everyone wondered: for she never was
sick, and had said nothing the day before about staying away.

[Illustration: "I want her to awaken from a nap and find the kittens
swinging in the basket."]

At the last moment Polly Dalton came hurrying in, saying, "Girls'
there's a scarlet fever sign on Dayres' door, so Lucile must be sick.
The nun was putting the sign up as I came by."

Later in the day it was found that several other children had fever,
or were afraid to come out lest they should get it, so the Hill School
was closed for a week. Edith Watts was very lonely without her little
friend, and spent much of her time writing letters to her, or in
thinking of nice things to do for her.

"I wish I could think of something very, _very_ sweet to do for her,
something that would make her happy all the time," she said. "It must
be so lonely and stupid for her to stay in the same room all the time,
never seeing any other children."

"Keep thinking about it and the right thought will come to you," mamma
told her, and mamma's advice turned out to be right, as usual.

Two days later, Edith came downstairs, her face shining.

"I know, mamma. I know what will make Lucile happy every day in the
whole six weeks she must stay in the house. The kittens! I will give
her my kittens. It has been nearly two weeks since she has seen them,
and they have grown so much and their fur has fluffed out so
beautifully she will hardly know them."

And the kittens were lovely. Who wouldn't want a present like that?
Edith loved them with all her heart, but she didn't for one minute
want to keep them for herself when she knew they would make Lucile
happy. She put them carefully in a basket, covering them well to keep
out the cold. A nice Indian hanging-basket that she had used for a
swing for the pets was packed, too, and then papa took the "happy
thought," as mamma called it, to Lucile's home.

"Remember, it must be a surprise for her," his small daughter reminded
him as he left the house. "I want her to awaken from a nap and find
the kittens swinging in the basket just where she can see them."

And that is the way Lucile saw them. If they ever had looked sweet to
Edith's eyes, they looked a thousand times more so to Lucile's poor,
tired ones.

"Oh-h-h!" she exclaimed, with a long-drawn, happy sigh. "You darling
darlings! Have you come to stay, or are you only visitors?"

The basket with its dainty load hung from a picture-hook near by, and
the new-comers looked quite contented to stay. They jumped into the
bed and did all they knew to cure the little girl. And they really
helped.--_Written for Dew Drops by Elizabeth Roberts Burton_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Knowledge Box

When Lapland Babies Go to Church.


When Sunday morning comes, the Lapland father harnesses his reindeer
to the sleigh. Father and mother wrap themselves in fur coats and put
a fur coat on the baby, and away they go over the snow to church, it
may be ten or even fifteen miles, for the reindeer can go a good deal
faster than a horse.

But the old Lapland custom of caring for the babies while the grown
people are in church, you never would guess. For as soon as the
reindeer is made secure, the father Lapp shovels out a snug little bed
in the snow, and when it is ready the mother Lapp wraps the baby snug
and warm in skins and lays it down there. Then the father Lapp piles
the snow around and over the baby, when they go into the church and
leave the baby in the snow. So common is this that sometimes there are
twenty or thirty babies, down to the little wee-est ones, buried in
snow around the church.

You might think the babies would suffocate, but they do not, nor do
they freeze. In fact, the snow does not make them cold. For when it
covers anyone all over, if they have clothes enough on, so the snow
will not melt and wet them, it will keep them warm. And as the little
Lapland babies are not strong enough to knock the snow away and let in
the cold, they just lie there safe and warm and go to sleep.

When church is out the father Lapp goes to the spot where his baby is,
puts his hands down into the snow, pulls the baby our and shakes the
snow off it; then the reindeer is unfastened, father and mother tuck
themselves and the baby in the sleigh, and over the snow away they
trot home again.--_Written for Dew Drops by Adele E. Thompson._

       *       *       *       *       *

MOTHER HULDA'S FEATHER BED.


How many children know what the boys and girls of far-off Norway
sometimes think when they see the dainty, feathery snowflakes flying
softly and silently through the air? I don't think there are many of
you who do know, so I will tell you the story.

If we were there when they have the first snowstorm of the season we
could hear them shouting gleefully to each other: "See! oh, see!
Mother Hulda is shaking her feather bed."

There is a story about this Mother Hulda and her feather bed that is
told to the little ones there. She lives, it is said, far, far above
this busy world, with the clouds for her home, the sun for a lamp and
fire.

She is always very busy, and especially so at the beginning of the
winter, for then she has to unpack her great feather bed, and after
that is done she spends all of her time shaking it. Indeed she shakes
it so much that she wears many holes in it, through which the feathers
fly in all directions. The wind catches them up and carries them
gently to the earth, where they cover the bare limbs of the trees,
making them beautiful, and where they spread lightly on the ground and
protect the roots of the flowers from the cold winter winds.

Mother Hulda does not tire of shaking her bed until the warmer spring
winds begin to blow; then she packs it away until she sees Jack Frost
traveling again over the world below, and finds traces of the
mischievous fellow even in her lofty home.--_Selected_.

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR LESSON.--March 8.

       *       *       *       *       *

PREPARED BY MARGUERITE COOK.

       *       *       *       *       *

Title.--Watchfulness (Temperance Lesson).--Luke 12:35-48.

Golden Text.--Blessed are those servants, whom the lord when he cometh
shall find watching.--Luke 12:37.

_Golden Text for Beginners_.--_Even a child maketh himself known by
his doings_.--Prov. 20:11.

Truth.--Be always ready.

1. Jesus told his disciples that they must be always ready and
watching for his coming.

[Illustration]

2. He told them to be like faithful servants, who, with their lights
burning, wait for the return of their absent master.

3. He said that the master who should come home and find his servants
watching for him would be pleased.

[Illustration]

4. He would invite them to sit down at his table, and he would serve
them himself.

5. Those faithful servants would receive a blessing.

6. Jesus warns us all to watch and be faithful about our work, so that
when he comes again we will be ready.

7. He says that no one knows the day nor the hour when he will return.

8. The master chooses the faithful servants to rule over his house.

9. The unfaithful servant will not be found watching when his master
shall come.

10. He will spend his time in eating and drinking and abusing his
fellow-servants.

[Illustration]

11. The master will come when he is not expected, and will see these
evil deeds and punish the servant for his unfaithfulness.

       *       *       *       *       *

QUESTIONS.

What is the Golden Text?

What is the Truth?

1. For what did Jesus tell his disciples to watch?

2. Like whom did he tell them to be?

3. Who would be pleased to find his servants watching?

4. What would he invite them to do?

5. What would they receive if found faithful?

6. What does Jesus warn us all to do?

7. Who knows when Jesus will return?

8. Who will be made ruler over his master's house?

9. Who will not be found watching?

10. How will he spend his time?

11. Who will come when he is not expected?

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON HYMN.

_Tune_--"Jesus loves me, this I know," omitting chorus (E flat).

    When our work on earth is done,
    Jesus calls us, every one;
    Let us work, and watch, and pray,
    For his coming, every day.

       *       *       *       *       *

Title of Lesson for March 15.

The Lawful Use of the Sabbath.--Luke 13:10-17; 14:1-6.

       *       *       *       *       *

Golden Text for March 15.

The sabbath was made for man.--Mark 2:27.

       *       *       *       *       *

Beginners Golden Text for March 15.

_Even a child maketh himself known by his doings_.--Prov. 20:11.

       *       *       *       *       *

Advice to Boys and Girls

The Difference it Made.


"What a sweet voice that little child in the red cloak has!" said a
visitor in Sunday-school to a teacher, as together they listened to
the children raising their song of praise.

"Yes, isn't it sweet? And she always sings just so heartily," was the
reply.

A little later, the school closed and, the children on their way
home, the visitor chanced to pass by the child in the red cloak, just
in time to hear her say angrily to her nurse, who had called for her:

"I don't want to go this way--I want to go through the park. I won't!
I won't go through that horrid old street!"

"But, Miss Mazie, your mamma said we were to go straight home and not
stay in the park to-day."

Upon this, the little lady marched away, with pouting lips and injured
mien.

"Ah," thought the lady, "what a difference it makes in the voice when
one speaks angrily! No matter how sweet it may be, how harsh and
unloving angry words make it!"

What a pity that Mazie did not keep her voice as musical and birdlike
as it was when she was singing her morning song of praise! Think of
this, little readers, and when you are tempted to be angry and speak
in cross tones, instead of making your voice unpleasant to hear,
endeavor to make it sweet and loving.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thoughts for Mothers

The Earnest Mother.


Mothers seldom realize the influence they exert in molding the lives
of their children. It is the faithful teaching, as well as the
consistent practicing of an earnest mother which results in forming
characters of nobility and uprightness in the sons and daughters. The
work cannot be begun too early. From their very birth, our children
receive impressions. What the character of these impressions is
depends upon surrounding influences. A true mother's influence should
last long after she is at rest. Said Thomas H. Benton: "My mother
asked me never to use tobacco; I have never touched it from that time
to the present day. She asked me not to gamble, and I have never
gambled, and I cannot tell who is losing in games that are being
played. She admonished me, too, against hard drinking, and whatever
capacity for endurance I have at present, and whatever usefulness I
may have attained in life, I have attributed to having complied with
her pious and correct wishes. When I was seven years of age she asked
me not to drink, and then I made a resolution of total abstinence; and
that I have adhered to it through all time, I owe to my mother."

Mothers, do not think your little ones are too young to receive
advice; it is true they may not act upon it for many years, but they
will remember it and follow it sometime.

       *       *       *       *       *

HURRAH FOR THE BOY THAT WHISTLES.

    Hurrah for the boy that whistles!
      Just now he passed by here.
    The rain dripped down from his sodden crown,
      But his whistle sounded clear;
    And it made my task seem easier,
      And my heart grew brave and strong,
    Hurrah for the boy that whistles!
      He helps the world along.
    --_Written for Dew Drops by Bertha E. Bush._

       *       *       *       *       *

[Entered at the Post Office at Elgin, Ill., as Second Class Mail Matter.]

Price of Dew Drops.--In lots of five or more, to one address, 20 cents
per copy per year, or 5-1/2 cents per copy per quarter. Address,

DAVID C. COOK PUBLISHING CO., ELGIN, ILL.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Dew Drops, Vol. 37, No. 10, March 8,
1914, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DEW DROPS, VOL. 37, NO. 10, ***

***** This file should be named 14101.txt or 14101.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/4/1/0/14101/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Ronald Holder, John Hagerson, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
