The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Communist Threat in the Taiwan Area, by
John Foster Dulles and Dwight D. Eisenhower


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: The Communist Threat in the Taiwan Area


Author: John Foster Dulles and Dwight D. Eisenhower



Release Date: June 28, 2005  [eBook #16142]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COMMUNIST THREAT IN THE TAIWAN
AREA***


E-text prepared by Justin Kerk, Richard J. Shiffer, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team



THE COMMUNIST THREAT IN THE TAIWAN AREA

Statement by Secretary Dulles

White House Statement

President Eisenhower's Report to the American People

President Eisenhower's Letter to Premier Khrushchev

The Department of State
Department of State Publication 6708
Far Eastern Series 76

Released September 1958

Public Services Division







THE COMMUNIST THREAT IN THE TAIWAN AREA

1. Statement by Secretary Dulles,

September 4, 1958


I have reviewed in detail with the President the serious situation
which has resulted from aggressive Chinese Communist military actions
in the Taiwan (Formosa) Straits area. The President has authorized me
to make the following statement.

1. Neither Taiwan (Formosa) nor the islands of Quemoy and Matsu have
ever been under the authority of the Chinese Communists. Since the end
of the Second World War, a period of over 13 years, they have
continuously been under the authority of Free China, that is, the
Republic of China.

2. The United States is bound by treaty to help to defend Taiwan
(Formosa) from armed attack and the President is authorized by joint
resolution of the Congress to employ the Armed Forces of the United
States for the securing and protecting of related positions such as
Quemoy and Matsu.

3. Any attempt on the part of the Chinese Communists now to seize
these positions or any of them would be a crude violation of the
principles upon which world order is based, namely, that no country
should use armed force to seize new territory.

4. The Chinese Communists have, for about 2 weeks, been subjecting
Quemoy to heavy artillery bombardment and, by artillery fire and use
of small naval craft, they have been harassing the regular supply of
the civilian and military population of the Quemoys, which totals some
125,000 persons. The official Peiping radio repeatedly announces the
purpose of these military operations to be to take by armed force
Taiwan (Formosa), as well as Quemoy and Matsu. In virtually every
Peiping broadcast Taiwan (Formosa) and the offshore islands are linked
as the objective of what is called the "Chinese Peoples Liberation
Army."

5. Despite, however, what the Chinese Communists say, and so far have
done, it is not yet certain that their purpose is in fact to make an
allout effort to conquer by force Taiwan (Formosa) and the offshore
islands. Neither is it apparent that such efforts as are being made,
or may be made, cannot be contained by the courageous, and purely
defensive, efforts of the forces of the Republic of China, with such
substantial logistical support as the United States is providing.

6. The joint resolution of Congress, above referred to, includes a
finding to the effect that "the secure possession by friendly
governments of the western Pacific island chain, of which Formosa is a
part, is essential to the vital interests of the United States and all
friendly nations in and bordering upon the Pacific Ocean." It further
authorizes the President to employ the Armed Forces of the United
States for the protection not only of Formosa but for "the securing
and protection of such related positions and territories of that area
now in friendly hands and the taking of such other measures as he
judges to be required or appropriate in assuring the defense of
Formosa." In view of the situation outlined in the preceding
paragraph, the President has not yet made any finding under that
resolution that the employment of the Armed Forces of the United
States is required or appropriate in insuring the defense of Formosa.
The President would not, however, hesitate to make such a finding if
he judged that the circumstances made this necessary to accomplish the
purposes of the joint resolution. In this connection, we have
recognized that the securing and protecting of Quemoy and Matsu have
increasingly become related to the defense of Taiwan (Formosa). This
is indeed also recognized by the Chinese Communists. Military
dispositions have been made by the United States so that a
Presidential determination, if made, would be followed by action both
timely and effective.

7. The President and I earnestly hope that the Chinese Communist
regime will not again, as in the case of Korea, defy the basic
principle upon which world order depends, namely, that armed force
should not be used to achieve territorial ambitions. Any such naked
use of force would pose an issue far transcending the offshore islands
and even the security of Taiwan (Formosa). It would forecast a
widespread use of force in the Far East which would endanger vital
free-world positions, and the security of the United States.
Acquiescence therein would threaten peace everywhere. We believe that
the civilized world community will never condone overt military
conquest as a legitimate instrument of policy.

8. The United States has not, however, abandoned hope that Peiping
will stop short of defying the will of mankind for peace. This would
not require it to abandon its claims, however ill-founded we may deem
them to be. I recall that in the extended negotiations which the
representatives of the United States and Chinese Communist regime
conducted at Geneva between 1955 and 1958, a sustained effort was made
by the United States to secure, with particular reference to the
Taiwan area, a declaration of mutual and reciprocal renunciation of
force, except in self-defense, which, however, would be without
prejudice to the pursuit of policies by peaceful means. The Chinese
Communists rejected any such declaration. We believe, however, that
such a course of conduct constitutes the only civilized and acceptable
procedure. The United States intends to follow that course, so far as
it is concerned, unless and until the Chinese Communists, by their
acts, leave us no choice but to react in defense of the principles to
which all peace-loving governments are dedicated.




2. White House Statement,

September 6, 1958


The President discussed the Taiwan Straits situation with the
Secretary of State, the Secretary of the Treasury, the Secretary of
Defense, and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff--members of the
National Security Council. Also present were the Director of the
United States Information Agency, the Director of the Office of Civil
and Defense Mobilization, and the Acting Director of the Central
Intelligence Agency. The Vice President, because of a long-standing
out of town engagement, was unable to be present.

Consideration was given to measures which would conform to the policy
enunciated on September 4 by the Secretary of State on the authority
of the President. But particular note was taken of the reported radio
statement of Mr. Chou En-lai indicating that the Chinese Communists
were prepared to resume ambassadorial talks with the United States "in
order to contribute further to the safeguarding of peace." These
talks, which had been conducted in Europe for several years, were
recently interrupted by the Chinese Communists.

So far the United States has not received any official word on this
subject. We hope, however, that the reported statement of Mr. Chou
En-lai is responsive to the urging, contained in our September 4
policy statement, that "armed force should not be used to achieve
territorial ambitions," although such renunciation of force need not
involve renouncing claims or the pursuit of policies by peaceful
means. This is the course that the United States will resolutely
pursue, in conforming with our vital interests, our treaty
obligations, and the principles on which world order is based.

The United States has sought to implement that policy in its past
talks at the ambassadorial level with the Chinese Communists. On July
28, 1958, and subsequently, we have sought a resumption of these
talks.

If the Chinese Communists are now prepared to respond, the United
States welcomes that decision. The United States Ambassador at Warsaw
stands ready promptly to meet with the Chinese Communist Ambassador
there, who has previously acted in this matter.

Naturally, in these resumed talks the United States will adhere to the
negotiating position which it originally took in 1955, namely, that we
will not in these talks be a party to any arrangement which would
prejudice the rights of our ally, the Republic of China.




3. President Eisenhower's Report to the American People,

September 11, 1958


MY FRIENDS: Tonight I want to talk to you about the
situation, dangerous to peace, which has developed in the Formosa
Straits in the Far East. My purpose is to give you its basic facts and
then my conclusions as to our Nation's proper course of action.

To begin, let us remember that traditionally this country and its
Government have always been passionately devoted to peace with honor,
as they are now. We shall never resort to force in settlement of
differences except when compelled to do so to defend against
aggression and to protect our vital interests.

This means that, in our view, negotiations and conciliation should
never be abandoned in favor of force and strife. While we shall never
timidly retreat before the threat of armed aggression, we would
welcome in the present circumstances negotiations that could have a
fruitful result in preserving the peace of the Formosa area and
reaching a solution that could be acceptable to all parties concerned
including, of course, our ally, the Republic of China.

On the morning of August 23d the Chinese Communists opened a severe
bombardment of Quemoy, an island in the Formosa Straits off the China
Coast. Another island in the same area, Matsu, was also attacked.
These two islands have always been a part of Free China--never under
Communist control.

This bombardment of Quemoy has been going on almost continuously ever
since. Also, Chinese Communists have been using their naval craft to
try to break up the supplying of Quemoy with its 125,000 people. Their
normal source of supply is by sea from Formosa, where the Government
of Free China is now located.

Chinese Communists say that they will capture Quemoy. So far they have
not actually attempted a landing, but their bombardment has caused
great damage. Over 1,000 people have been killed or wounded. In large
part these are civilians.

This is a tragic affair. It is shocking that in this day and age naked
force should be used for such aggressive purposes.

But this is not the first time that the Chinese Communists have acted
in this way.

In 1950 they attacked and tried to conquer the Republic of Korea. At
that time President Truman announced the intention of protecting
Formosa, the principal area still held by Free China, because of the
belief that Formosa's safety was vital to the security of the United
States and the free world. Our Government has adhered firmly ever
since 1950 to that policy.

In 1953 and 1954 the Chinese Communists took an active part in the war
in Indochina against Viet-Nam.

In the fall of 1954 they attacked Quemoy and Matsu, the same two
islands they are attacking now. They broke off that attack when, in
January 1955, the Congress and I agreed that we should firmly support
Free China.

Since then, for about 4 years, Chinese Communists have not used force
for aggressive purposes. We have achieved an armistice in Korea which
stopped the fighting there in 1953. There is a 1954 armistice in
Viet-Nam; and since 1955 there has been quiet in the Formosa Straits
area. We had hoped that the Chinese Communists were becoming
peaceful--but it seems not.

So the world is again faced with the problem of armed aggression.
Powerful dictatorships are attacking an exposed, but free, area.

What should we do?

Shall we take the position that, submitting to threat, it is better to
surrender pieces of free territory in the hope that this will satisfy
the appetite of the aggressor and we shall have peace?

Do we not still remember that the name of "Munich" symbolizes a vain
hope of appeasing dictators?

At that time the policy of appeasement was tried, and it failed. Prior
to the Second World War Mussolini seized Ethiopia. In the Far East
Japanese warlords were grabbing Manchuria by force. Hitler sent his
armed forces into the Rhineland in violation of the Versailles Treaty.
Then he annexed little Austria. When he got away with that, he next
turned to Czechoslovakia and began taking it bit by bit.

In the face of all these attacks on freedom by the dictators, the
powerful democracies stood aside. It seemed that Ethiopia and
Manchuria were too far away and too unimportant to fight about. In
Europe appeasement was looked upon as the way to peace. The
democracies felt that if they tried to stop what was going on that
would mean war. But, because of these repeated retreats, war came just
the same.

If the democracies had stood firm at the beginning, almost surely
there would have been no World War. Instead they gave such an
appearance of weakness and timidity that aggressive rulers were
encouraged to overrun one country after another. In the end the
democracies saw that their very survival was at stake. They had no
alternative but to turn and fight in what proved to be the most
terrible war that the world has ever known.

I know something about that war, and I never want to see that history
repeated. But, my fellow Americans, it certainly can be repeated if
the peace-loving democratic nations again fearfully practice a policy
of standing idly by while big aggressors use armed force to conquer
the small and weak.

Let us suppose that the Chinese Communists conquer Quemoy. Would that
be the end of the story? We know that it would not be the end of the
story. History teaches that, when powerful despots can gain something
through aggression, they try, by the same methods, to gain more and
more and more.

Also, we have more to guide us than the teachings of history. We have
the statements, the boastings, of the Chinese Communists themselves.
They frankly say that their present military effort is part of a
program to conquer Formosa.

It is as certain as can be that the shooting which the Chinese
Communists started on August 23d had as its purpose not just the
taking of the island of Quemoy. It is part of what is indeed an
ambitious plan of armed conquest.

This plan would liquidate all of the free-world positions in the
western Pacific area and bring them under captive governments which
would be hostile to the United States and the free world. Thus the
Chinese and Russian Communists would come to dominate at least the
western half of the now friendly Pacific Ocean.

So aggression by ruthless despots again imposes a clear danger to the
United States and to the free world.

In this effort the Chinese Communists and the Soviet Union appear to
be working hand in hand. Last Monday I received a long letter on this
subject from Prime Minister Khrushchev. He warned the United States
against helping its allies in the western Pacific. He said that we
should not support the Republic of China and the Republic of Korea. He
contended that we should desert them, return all of our naval forces
to our home bases, and leave our friends in the Far East to face,
alone, the combined military power of the Soviet Union and Communist
China.

Does Mr. Khrushchev think that we have so soon forgotten Korea?

I must say to you very frankly and soberly, my friends, the United
States cannot accept the result that the Communists seek. Neither can
we show, now, a weakness of purpose--a timidity--which would surely
lead them to move more aggressively against us and our friends in the
western Pacific area.

If the Chinese Communists have decided to risk a war, it is not
because Quemoy itself is so valuable to them. They have been getting
along without Quemoy ever since they seized the China mainland 9 years
ago.

If they have now decided to risk a war, it can only be because they,
and their Soviet allies, have decided to find out whether threatening
war is a policy from which they can make big gains.

If that is their decision, then a western Pacific Munich would not buy
us peace or security. It would encourage the aggressors. It would
dismay our friends and allies there. If history teaches anything,
appeasement would make it more likely that we would have to fight a
major war.

Congress has made clear its recognition that the security of the
western Pacific is vital to the security of the United States and that
we should be firm. The Senate has ratified, by overwhelming vote,
security treaties with the Republic of China covering Formosa and the
Pescadores, and also the Republic of Korea. We have a mutual security
treaty with the Republic of the Philippines, which could be next in
line for conquest if Formosa fell into hostile hands. These treaties
commit the United States to the defense of the treaty areas. In
addition, there is a joint resolution which the Congress passed in
January 1955 dealing specifically with Formosa and the offshore
islands of Free China in the Formosa Straits.

At that time the situation was similar to what it is today.

Congress then voted the President authority to employ the Armed Forces
of the United States for the defense not only of Formosa but of
related positions, such as Quemoy and Matsu, if I believed their
defense to be appropriate in assuring the defense of Formosa.

I might add that the mandate from the Congress was given by an almost
unanimous bipartisan vote.

Today, the Chinese Communists announce, repeatedly and officially,
that their military operations against Quemoy are preliminary to
attack on Formosa. So it is clear that the Formosa Straits resolution
of 1955 applies to the present situation.

If the present bombardment and harassment of Quemoy should be
converted into a major assault, with which the local defenders could
not cope, then we would be compelled to face precisely the situation
that Congress visualized in 1955.

I have repeatedly sought to make clear our position in this matter so
that there would not be danger of Communist miscalculation. The
Secretary of State on September 4th made a statement to the same end.
This statement could not, of course, cover every contingency. Indeed,
I interpret the joint resolution as requiring me not to make absolute
advance commitments but to use my judgment according to the
circumstances of the time. But the statement did carry a clear meaning
to the Chinese Communists and to the Soviet Union. There will be no
retreat in the face of armed aggression, which is part and parcel of a
continuing program of using armed force to conquer new regions.

I do not believe that the United States can be either lured or
frightened into appeasement. I believe that, in taking the position of
opposing aggression by force, I am taking the only position which is
consistent with the vital interests of the United States and, indeed,
with the peace of the world.

Some misguided persons have said that Quemoy is nothing to become
excited about. They said the same about south Korea--about Viet-Nam,
about Lebanon.

Now I assure you that no American boy will be asked by me to fight
_just_ for Quemoy. But those who make up our Armed Forces--and, I
believe the American people as a whole--do stand ready to defend the
principle that armed force shall not be used for aggressive purposes.

Upon observance of that principle depends a lasting and just peace. It
is that same principle that protects the western Pacific free-world
positions as well as the security of our homeland. If we are not ready
to defend this principle, then indeed tragedy after tragedy would
befall us.

But there is a far better way than resort to force to settle these
differences, and there is some hope that such a better way may be
followed.

That is the way of negotiation.

That way is open and prepared because in 1955 arrangements were made
between the United States and the Chinese Communists that an
Ambassador on each side would be authorized to discuss at Geneva
certain problems of common concern. These included the matter of
release of American civilians imprisoned in Communist China, and such
questions as the renunciation of force in the Formosa area. There have
been 73 meetings since August 1955.

When our Ambassador, who was conducting these negotiations, was
recently transferred to another post, we named as successor Mr. [Jacob
D.] Beam, our Ambassador to Poland. The Chinese Communists were
notified accordingly the latter part of July, but there was no
response.

The Secretary of State, in his September 4th statement, referred to
these Geneva negotiations. Two days later, Mr. Chou En-lai, the
Premier of the People's Republic of China, proposed that these talks
should be resumed "in the interests of peace." This was followed up on
September 8th by Mr. Mao Tse-tung, the Chairman of the People's
Republic of China. We promptly welcomed this prospect and instructed
our Ambassador at Warsaw to be ready immediately to resume these
talks. We expect that the talks will begin upon the return to Warsaw
of the Chinese Communist Ambassador, who has been in Peiping.

Perhaps our suggestion may be bearing fruit. We devoutly hope so.

Naturally, the United States will adhere to the position it first took
in 1955, that we will not in these talks be a party to any
arrangements which would prejudice rights of our ally, the Republic of
China.

We know by hard experiences that the Chinese Communist leaders are
indeed militant and aggressive. But we cannot believe that they would
now persist in a course of military aggression which would threaten
world peace, with all that would be involved. We believe that
diplomacy can and should find a way out. There are measures that can
be taken to assure that these offshore islands will not be a thorn in
the side of peace. We believe that arrangements are urgently required
to stop gunfire and to pave the way to a peaceful solution.

If the bilateral talks between Ambassadors do not fully succeed, there
is still the hope that the United Nations could exert a peaceful
influence on the situation.

In 1955 the hostilities of the Chinese Communists in the Formosa area
were brought before the United Nations Security Council. But the
Chinese Communists rejected its jurisdiction. They said that they were
entitled to Formosa and the offshore islands and that, if they used
armed force to get them, that was purely a "civil war" and that the
United Nations had no right to concern itself.

They claimed also that the attack by the Communist north Koreans on
south Korea was "civil war," and that the United Nations and the
United States were "aggressors" because they helped south Korea. They
said the same about their attack on Viet-Nam.

I feel sure that these pretexts will never deceive or control world
opinion. The fact is that Communist Chinese hostilities in the Formosa
Straits area do endanger world peace. I do not believe that any
rulers, however aggressive they may be, will flout efforts to find a
peaceful and honorable solution, whether it be by direct negotiations
or through the United Nations.

My friends, we are confronted with a serious situation. But it is
typical of the security problems of the world today. Powerful and
aggressive forces are constantly probing, now here, now there, to see
whether the free world is weakening. In the face of this there are no
easy choices available. It is misleading for anyone to imply that
there are.

However, the present situation, though serious, is by no means
desperate or hopeless.

There is not going to be any appeasement.

I believe that there is not going to be any war.

But there must be sober realization by the American people that our
legitimate purposes are again being tested by those who threaten peace
and freedom everywhere.

This has not been the first test for us and for the free world.
Probably it will not be the last. But as we meet each test with
courage and unity, we contribute to the safety and the honor of our
beloved land--and to the cause of a just and lasting peace.




4. President Eisenhower's Letter to Premier Khrushchev,

September 13, 1958


DEAR MR. CHAIRMAN: I have your letter of September 7. I agree
with you that a dangerous situation exists in the Taiwan area. I do
not agree with you as to the source of danger in this situation.

The present state of tension in the Taiwan area was created directly
by Chinese Communist action, not by that of the Republic of China or
by the United States. The fact is that following a long period of
relative calm in that area, the Chinese Communists, without
provocation, suddenly initiated a heavy artillery bombardment of
Quemoy and began harassing the regular supply of the civilian and
military population of the Quemoys. This intense military activity was
begun on August 23rd--some three weeks after your visit to Peiping.
The official Peiping Radio has repeatedly been announcing that the
purpose of these military operations is to take Taiwan (Formosa) as
well as Quemoy and Matsu, by armed force. In virtually every Peiping
broadcast, Taiwan (Formosa) and the offshore islands are linked as the
objective of what is called the "Chinese Peoples Liberation Army".

The issue, then, is whether the Chinese Communists will seek to
achieve their ambitions through the application of force, as they did
in Korea, or whether they will accept the vital requisite of world
peace and order in a nuclear age and renounce the use of force as the
means for satisfying their territorial claims. The territory concerned
has never been under the control of Communist China. On the contrary,
the Republic of China--despite the characterizations you apply to it
for ideological reasons--is recognized by the majority of the
sovereign nations of the world and its Government has been and is
exercising jurisdiction over the territory concerned. United States
military forces operate in the Taiwan area in fulfillment of treaty
commitments to the Republic of China to assist it in the defense of
Taiwan (Formosa) and the Penghu (Pescadores) Islands. They are there
to help resist aggression--not to commit aggression. No upside down
presentation such as contained in your letter can change this fact.

The United States Government has welcomed the willingness of the
Chinese Communists to resume the ambassadorial talks, which were begun
three years ago in Geneva, for the purpose of finding a means of
easing tensions in the Taiwan area. In the past, the United States
representative at these talks has tried by every reasonable means to
persuade the Chinese Communist representative to reach agreement on
mutual renunciation of force in the Taiwan area but the latter
insistently refused to reach such agreement. The United States hopes
that an understanding can be achieved through the renewed talks which
will assure that there will be no resort to the use of force in the
endeavor to bring about a solution of the issues there.

I regret to say I do not see in your letter any effort to find that
common language which could indeed facilitate the removal of the
danger existing in the current situation in the Taiwan area. On the
contrary, the description of this situation contained in your letter
seems designed to serve the ambitions of international communism
rather than to present the facts. I also note that you have addressed
no letter to the Chinese Communist leaders urging moderation upon
them. If your letter to me is not merely a vehicle for one-sided
denunciation of United States actions but is indeed intended to
reflect a desire to find a common language for peace, I suggest you
urge these leaders to discontinue their military operations and to
turn to a policy of peaceful settlement of the Taiwan dispute.

If indeed, for the sake of settling the issues that tend to disturb
the peace in the Formosa area, the Chinese Communist leaders can be
persuaded to place their trust in negotiation and a readiness to
practice conciliation, then I assure you the United States will, on
its part, strive in that spirit earnestly to the same end.

Sincerely,

DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COMMUNIST THREAT IN THE TAIWAN
AREA***


******* This file should be named 16142.txt or 16142.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/6/1/4/16142



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

