The Project Gutenberg EBook of Cinderella, by Henry W. Hewet

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Cinderella

Author: Henry W. Hewet

Release Date: January 25, 2004 [EBook #10830]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CINDERELLA ***




Produced by Internet Archive; University of Florida, Children, Sandra
Brown and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.





[Illustration]


HEWET'S

HOUSEHOLD STORIES

FOR LITTLE FOLKS

ILLUSTRATED

W. H. THWAITE

ENGRAVED BY THE BEST ARTISTS.


VOL I.

CINDERELLA



1855




[Illustration: Frontispiece]




CINDERELLA;

Or,

THE LITTLE GLASS SLIPPER.


There once lived a gentleman and his wife, who were the parents of a
lovely little daughter.

When this child was only nine years of age, her mother fell sick.
Finding her death coming on, she called her child to her and said to
her, "My child, always be good; bear every thing that happens to you
with patience, and whatever evil and troubles you may suffer, you will
be happy in the end if you are so." Then the poor lady died, and her
daughter was full of great grief at the loss of a mother so good and
kind.

The father too was unhappy, but he sought to get rid of his sorrow by
marrying another wife, and he looked out for some prudent lady who might
be a second mother to his child, and a companion to himself. His choice
fell on a widow lady, of a proud and tyrannical temper, who had two
daughters by a former marriage, both as haughty and bad-tempered as
their mother. No sooner was the wedding over, than the step-mother began
to show her bad temper. She could not bear her step-daughter's good
qualities, that only showed up her daughters' unamiable ones still more
obviously, and she accordingly compelled the poor girl to do all the
drudgery of the household. It was she who washed the dishes, and
scrubbed down the stairs, and polished the floors in my lady's chamber
and in those of the two pert misses, her daughters; and while the latter
slept on good feather beds in elegant rooms, furnished with full-length
looking-glasses, their sister lay in a wretched garret on an old straw
mattress. Yet the poor thing bore this ill treatment very meekly, and
did not dare complain to her father, who thought so much of his wife
that he would only have scolded her.

When her work was done, she used to sit in the chimney-corner amongst
the cinders, which had caused the nickname of _Cinderella_ to be given
her by the family; yet, for all her shabby clothes, Cinderella was a
hundred times prettier than her sisters, let them be dressed ever so
magnificently.

The poor little Cinder-wench! this harsh stepmother was a sore trial to
her; and how often, as she sate sadly by herself, did she feel that
there is no mother like our own, the dear parent whose flesh and blood
we are, and who bears all our little cares and sorrows tenderly as in
the apple of her eye!

It happened that the king's son gave a ball, to which he invited all the
nobility; and, as our two young ladies made a great figure in the world,
they were included in the list of invitations. So they began to be very
busy choosing what head-dress and which gown would be the most becoming.
Here was fresh work for poor Cinderella: for it was she, forsooth, who
was to starch and get up their ruffles, and iron all their fine linen;
and nothing but dress was talked about for days together. "I," said the
eldest, "shall put on my red velvet dress, with my point-lace
trimmings." "And I," said the younger sister, "shall wear my usual
petticoat, but shall set it off with my gold brocaded train and my
circlet of diamonds."

[Illustration: CINDERELLA DRESSING HER SISTER'S HAIR.]

They sent for a clever tire-woman to prepare the double rows of quilling
for their caps, and they purchased a quantity of fashionably cut
patches. They called in Cinderella to take her advice, as she had such
good taste, and Cinderella not only advised them  well,  but offered to
dress their hair, which they were pleased to accept. While she was thus
busied, the sisters said to her: "And pray, Cinderella, would you like
to go to the ball?"

"Nay, you are mocking me," replied the poor girl; "it is not for such as
I to go to balls." "True enough," rejoined they; "folks would laugh to
see a Cinderella at a court ball."

These two step-sisters were very cruel to Cinderella, and ill-used her
much. Ah! what sweet friends are our own born sisters!--there can be no
substitutes like them in the whole wide world.

Any other but Cinderella would have dressed their hair awry to punish
them for their impertinence, but she was so good-natured that she
dressed them most becomingly. Although they disdained her, and while
they would themselves make a great figure in the world, sought to
degrade and lower her, see how the lovely disposition of Cinderella
shines out. Although she was not allowed to go to the ball of the king's
son, she not only advised them well how they could array themselves to
appear to the best advantage, but she even--what greatness of heart to
do that!--with her own hands dresses their hair, and in the most
becoming manner her delicate taste can suggest.

The two sisters were so delighted, that they scarcely ate a morsel for a
couple of days. They spent their whole time before a looking-glass, and
they would be laced so tight, to make their waists as slender as
possible, that more than a dozen stay-laces were broken in the attempt.

The long-wished-for evening came at last, and these proud misses stepped
into the carriage and drove away to the palace. Cinderella looked after
the coach as far as she could see, and then returned to the kitchen in
tears; where, for the first time, she bewailed her hard and cruel
degradation. She continued sobbing in the corner of the chimney, until a
rapping at the kitchen-door roused her, and she got up to see what had
occasioned, it. She found a little old beggar-woman hobbling on
crutches, who besought her to give her some food. "I have only part of
my own supper for you, Goody, which is no better than a dry crust. But
if you like to step in and warm yourself, you can do so, and welcome."
"Thank you, my dear," said the old woman in a feeble, croaking voice.
She then hobbled in and took her seat by the fire.

"Hey! dearee me! what are all these tears, my child?" said the old
woman. And then Cinderella told the old woman all her griefs; how her
sisters had gone to the ball, and how she wished to go too, but had no
clothes, or means to do so.

"But you _shall_ go, my darling," said the old woman, "or I am not
Queen of the Faeries or your Godmother. Dry up your tears like a good
god-daughter and do as I bid you, and you shall have clothes and horses
finer than any one."

Cinderella had heard her father often talk of her godmother, and tell
her that she was one of those good faeries who protect children. Her
spirits revived, and she wiped away her tears.

The faery took Cinderella by the hand, and said, "Now, my dear, go into
the garden and fetch me a pumpkin." Cinderella bounded lightly to
execute her commands, and returned with one of the finest and largest
pumpkins she could meet with. It was as big as a beer barrel, and
Cinderella trundled it into the kitchen, wondering what her godmother
would do with it. Her godmother took the pumpkin, and scooped out the
inside of it, leaving nothing but rind; she then struck it with her
wand, and it instantly became one of the most elegant gilt carriages
ever seen.

She next sent Cinderella into the pantry for the mouse-trap, bidding her
bring six little mice alive which she would find in the trap. Cinderella
hastened to the pantry, and there found the mice as the faery had said,
which she brought to the old lady, who told her to lift up the door of
the trap but a little way and very gently, so that only one of the mice
might go out at a time.

Cinderella raised the mouse-trap door, and as the mice came out one by
one, the old woman touched them with her wand, and transformed them into
fine prancing dapple-gray carriage horses with long manes and tails,
which were tied up with light-blue ribands.

"Now, my dear good child," said the faery, "here you have a coach and
horses, much handsomer than your sisters', to say the least of them; but
as we have neither a postilion nor a coachman to take care of them, run
quickly to the stable, where the rat-trap is placed, and bring it to
me."

Cinderella was full of joy, and did not lose a moment; and soon returned
with the trap, in which there were two fine large rats. These, too, were
touched with the wand, and immediately the one was changed into a smart
postilion, and the other into a jolly-looking coachman in full finery.

Her godmother then said, "My dear Cinderella, you must go to the garden
again before I can complete your equipage; when you get there, keep to
the right side, and close to the wall you will see the watering-pot
standing; look behind it, and there you will find six lizards, which you
must bring to me immediately."

Cinderella hastened to the garden as she was desired, and found the six
lizards, which she put into her apron and brought to the faery. Another
touch of the wonderful wand soon converted them into six spruce footmen
in dashing liveries, with powdered hair and pig-tails, three-cornered
cocked hats and gold-headed canes, who immediately jumped up behind the
carriage as nimbly as if they had been footmen and nothing else all
their lives.

The coachman and postilion having likewise taken their places, the faery
said to Cinderella, "Well, my dear girl, is not this as fine an equipage
as you could desire to go to the ball with? Tell me, now, are you
pleased with it?"

"O yes, dear godmother," replied Cinderella; and then, with a good deal
of hesitation, added, "but how can I make my appearance among so many
finely-dressed people in these mean-looking clothes?"

"Give yourself no uneasiness about that, my dear; the most laborious
part of our task is already accomplished, and it will be hard if I
cannot make your dress correspond with your coach and servants."

On saying this, the old woman, assuming her character of Queen of the
Faeries, touched Cinderella with the magic wand, and her clothes were
instantly changed into a most magnificent ball dress, ornamented with
the most costly jewels. The faery took from her pocket a beautiful pair
of elastic glass slippers, which she caused Cinderella to put on, and
then desired her to get into the carriage with all expedition, as the
ball had already commenced.

Two footmen opened the carriage door, and assisted the now beautifully
dressed Cinderella into it. Her godmother, before she took leave,
strictly charged her, on no account whatever to stay at the ball after
the clock had struck twelve; and then added, that if she stopped but a
single moment beyond that time, her fine coach, horses, coachman,
postilion, and footmen, and fine apparel, would all return to their
original shapes of pumpkin, mice, rats, lizards, and mean-looking
clothes.

Cinderella promised faithfully to attend to every thing that the faery
had mentioned; and then, quite overjoyed, gave the direction to the
footman, who bawled out in a loud and commanding tone to the coachman,
"To the Royal Palace." The coachman touched his prancing horses lightly
with his whip, and swiftly the carriage started off, and in a short time
reached the palace.

[ILLUSTRATION: CINDERELLA'S ARRIVAL AT THE PALACE IN HER ELEGANT GILT
CARRIAGE, WHICH ATTRACTS GENERAL NOTICE AS IT DRIVES UP TO THE MARBLE
PORTICO; OF WHICH INFORMATION IS COMMUNICATED TO THE PRINCE, WHO HASTENS
TO THE DOOR AND WELCOMES CINDERELLA, HANDS HER OUT OF THE CARRIAGE, AND
GRACEFULLY LEADS HER INTO THE PALACE, WHERE THE NOBLES WELCOME HER AS A
PRINCESS.]

The arrival of so splendid an equipage as Cinderella's could not fail to
attract general notice at the palace gates; and as it drove up to the
marble portico, the servants in great numbers came out to see it.
Information was quickly taken to the king's son, that a beautiful young
lady, evidently some princess, was in waiting. His Royal Highness
hastened to the door, welcomed Cinderella, and handed her out of the
carriage. He then led her gracefully into the ball-room, and introduced
her to his father, the king. The moment she appeared, all conversation
was hushed, the violins ceased playing, and the dancing stopped short,
so great was the sensation produced by the stranger's beauty. A confused
murmur of admiration fluttered through the crowd, and each was fain to
exclaim, "How surpassingly lovely she is!" The ladies were all busy
examining her head-dress and her clothes, in order to get similar ones
the very next day, if, indeed, they could meet with stuffs of such rich
patterns, and find workwomen clever enough to make them up. "What a
lovely creature! so fair!--so beautiful!--What a handsome figure!--how
elegantly she is dressed!" Even the prince's father, old as he was,
could not behold her with indifference, but wiped his eye-glass and used
it very much, and said very often to the queen, that he had never seen
so sweet a being.

[Illustration: CINDERELLA IS PRESENTED BY THE PRINCE TO THE KING AND
QUEEN, WHO WELCOME HER WITH THE HONORS DUE TO A GREAT PRINCESS, AND IS
THEN LED INTO THE ROYAL BALL-ROOM.]

The king's son handed Cinderella to one of the most distinguished seats
on the dais at the top of the Hall, and begged she would allow him to
hand her some refreshments. Cinderella received them with great grace.
When this was over, the prince requested to have the honour of dancing
with her. Cinderella smiled consent; and the delighted prince
immediately led her out to the head of the dance, just about to
commence. The eyes of the whole company were fixed upon the beautiful
pair.

The trumpets sounded and the music struck up, and the dance commenced;
but if Cinderella's beauty, elegant figure, and the splendor of her
dress, had before drawn the attention of the whole room, the
astonishment at her dancing was still greater.

Gracefulness seemed to play in all her motions; the airy lightness with
which she floated along--as buoyant as thistle-down--drew forth a
general murmur of admiration. The hall rang with the loudest
acclamations of applause, and the company, all in one voice, pronounced
her the most elegant creature that had ever been seen. And this was the
little girl who had passed a great part of her life in the kitchen, and
had always been called a "Cinder-wench."

When the dance was ended, a magnificent feast was served up, consisting
of all delicacies: so much was the young prince engaged with Cinderella,
that he did not eat one morsel of the supper.

Cinderella drew near her sisters, and frequently spoke to them; and in
her goodness of heart she offered them the delicacies which she had
received from the prince:  but they did not know she was their sister.

When Cinderella heard the clock strike three-quarters past eleven, she
made a low courtesy to the whole assembly and retired in haste.

You see how fortune befriends the good-hearted, and even out of such
unpromising material as a pumpkin and mice, can make a coach and six,
with which to honor her worthy favorite. So Cinderella goes to the ball;
but to teach her to be diligent and faithful in her engagements, her
faery godmother enjoins upon her that she return home at twelve. Native
beauty and grace attract the princely heart; and while the king's son
pays no heed to her pretentious sisters, he is all grace and
condescension to little Cinderella. Obedient to her engagement with her
godmother, she returns in all the splendor and honor of the coach and
six.

On reaching home, she found her godmother; and after thanking her for
the treat she had enjoyed, she ventured to express a wish to return to
the ball on the following evening, as the prince had requested her to
do.

She was still relating to her godmother all that had happened at court,
when her two sisters knocked at the door. Cinderella went and let them
in, pretending to yawn and stretch herself, and rub her eyes, and
saying, "How late you are!" just as if she was waked up out of a nap,
though, truth to say, she had never felt less disposed to sleep in her
life. "If you had been to the ball," said one of the sisters, "you would
not have thought it late. There came the most beautiful princess ever
seen, who loaded us with polite attentions, and gave us oranges and
citrons."

Cinderella could scarcely contain her delight, and inquired the name of
the princess. But they replied that nobody knew her name, and that the
king's son was in great trouble about her, and would give the world to
know who she could be. "Is she, then, so very beautiful?" said
Cinderella, smiling. "Oh, my! how I should like to see her! Oh, do, my
Lady Javotte, lend me the yellow dress you wear every day, that I may go
to the ball and have a peep at this wonderful princess." "A likely
story, indeed!" cried Javotte, tossing her head disdainfully, "that I
should lend my clothes to a dirty Cinderella like you!"

Cinderella expected to be refused, and was not sorry for it, as she
would have been puzzled what to do, had her sister really lent her the
dress she begged to have.

On the following evening the sisters again went to the  court ball, and
so did Cinderella, dressed even more magnificently than before. The
king's son never left her side, and kept paying her the most flattering
attentions. The young lady was nothing loth to listen to him; so it came
to pass that she forgot her godmother's injunctions, and, indeed, lost
her reckoning so completely, that before she deemed it could be eleven
o'clock, she was startled at hearing the first stroke of midnight. She
rose hastily, and flew away like a startled fawn. The prince attempted
to follow her, but she was too swift for him; only, as she flew she
dropped one of her glass slippers, which he picked up very eagerly.
Cinderella reached home quite out of breath, without either coach or
footmen, and with only her shabby clothes on her back; nothing, in
short, remained of her recent magnificence, save a little glass slipper,
the fellow to the one she had lost.

[Illustration: CINDERELLA DANCING WITH THE PRINCE IS ADMIRED FOR HER
GRACEFULNESS. THE CLOCK STRIKES TWELVE: SHE HAVING FORGOT HER
GOD-MOTHER'S INSTRUCTIONS, IS ALARMED, FLIES OUT OF THE BALL-ROOM--HER
GORGEOUS APPAREL IS CHANGED INTO THE DRESS OF A CINDER-WENCH, AND HER
SPLENDID EQUIPAGE INTO A PUMPKIN, RATS, MICE AND LIZARDS.]

The sentinels at the palace gate were closely questioned as to whether
they had not seen a princess coming out; but they answered they had seen
no one except a shabbily dressed girl, who appeared to be a peasant
rather than a young lady.

On this second night, as you have taken notice, dazzled by worldly show
and the pleasing flattery of her royal lover, Cinderella over-stays her
time, and is compelled to make her way back to her father's house on
foot and in rags--an everlasting lesson to all the pretty little
Cinderellas in the world to keep their word, and to act in good faith by
such as befriend them. Never mind--her heart is in the right place--she
is a charming good creature; and although virtue goes home in rags, it
will leave some token behind--some foot-print by which it can be known
and traced wherever it has once walked. We shall hear from that little
lost glass slipper again!

[Illustration: CINDERELLA RETURNED SHABBILY DRESSED.]

When the two sisters returned from the ball, Cinderella asked them
whether they had been well entertained; and whether the beautiful lady
was there? They replied, that she was; but that she had run away as soon
as midnight had struck, and so quickly as to drop one of her dainty
glass slippers, which the king's son had picked up, and was looking at
most fondly during the remainder of the ball; indeed, it seemed beyond a
doubt that he was deeply enamored of the beautiful creature to whom it
belonged.

They spoke truly enough; for, a few days afterwards, the king's son
caused a proclamation to be made, by sound of trumpet all over the
kingdom, to the effect that he would marry her whose foot should be
found to fit the slipper exactly. So the slipper was first tried on by
all the princesses; then by all the duchesses; and next by all the
persons belonging to the court; but in vain. It was then carried to the
two sisters, who tried with all their might to force their feet into its
delicate proportions, but with no better success. Cinderella, who was
present, and recognized her slipper, now laughed, and said, "Suppose I
were to try?" Her sisters ridiculed such an idea; but the gentleman who
was appointed to try the slipper, having looked attentively at
Cinderella, and perceived how beautiful she was, said that it was but
fair she should do so, as he had orders to try it on every young maiden
in the kingdom. Accordingly, having requested Cinderella to sit down,
she no sooner put her little foot to the slipper, than she drew it on,
and it fitted like wax. The sisters were quite amazed; but their
astonishment increased tenfold when Cinderella drew the fellow slipper
out of her pocket, and put it on. Her godmother then made her
appearance; and, having touched Cinderella's clothes with her wand, made
them still more magnificent than those she had previously worn.

[Illustration: THE HERALDS OF THE COURT ANNOUNCE THE PROCLAMATION THAT
THE PRINCE WOULD MARRY THE LADY WHOM THE GLASS SLIPPER FITTED.
CINDERELLA TRIES ON THE SLIPPER, WHICH FITS HER DELICATE FOOT, TO THE
GREAT ASTONISHMENT OF HER FAMILY.]

Her two sisters now recognized her for the beautiful stranger they had
seen at the ball; and, falling at her feet, implored her forgiveness for
their unworthy treatment, and all the insults they had heaped upon her
head. Cinderella raised them, saying, as she embraced them, that she not
only forgave them with all her heart, but wished for their affection.
She was then taken to the palace of the young prince, in whose eyes she
appeared yet more lovely than before, and who married her shortly after.

Cinderella, who was as good as she was beautiful, allowed her sisters to
lodge in the palace, and gave them in marriage, that same day, to two
lords belonging to the court.

[Illustration: MARRIAGE OF THE PRINCE AND CINDERELLA.]

The amiable qualities of Cinderella were as conspicuous after as they
had been before marriage.




       *       *       *       *       *


This series of FAIRY STORIES has for generations been listened to and
read by Children with an inexpressible delight, which other books have
failed to afford them.

The extravagance of the Stories--the attractive manner of telling
them--the picturesque scenery described--the marvellous deeds
related--the reward of virtue and punishment of vice, upon principles
strictly in accordance with ethical laws, as applied to the formation of
character, render them peculiarly adapted to induce children to acquire
a love for reading, and to aid them to cultivate the affections,
sympathies, fancy, and imagination.

The principle, that good examples only should be imitated, has been lost
sight of in the Pictorial embellishment of these standard Fairy Stories,
upon the assumption that indifferent pictures are good enough to give
first impressions of Art to Children. If this holds true then language
and morals of a questionable cast will subserve the same ends; but the
fallacy of this dogma  notwithstanding, no one upon reflection will
deny.

That this edition of these Stories may be more perfect than any other
extant, the publisher has embellished it with exquisite specimens of
high Pictorial Art, from which Children may derive those correct ideas
that will mature into the beautiful and grand.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Cinderella, by Henry W. Hewet

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CINDERELLA ***

***** This file should be named 10830.txt or 10830.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/8/3/10830/

Produced by Internet Archive; University of Florida, Children, Sandra
Brown and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


