The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is Going On
In It, Vol. 1, No. 57, December 9, 1897, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Great Round World and What Is Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 57, December 9, 1897
       A Weekly Magazine for Boys and Girls

Author: Various

Editor: Julia Truitt Bishop

Release Date: July 3, 2005 [EBook #16192]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD AND ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.(www.pgdp.net)







[Illustration: THE GREAT ROUND
WORLD
AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT.]

    VOL. 1   DECEMBER 9, 1897.   NO. 57

=Copyright, 1897, by THE GREAT ROUND WORLD Publishing Company.=

Germany is furnishing us with some interesting news this week.

She has successfully accomplished something which, to simple folks who
are not diplomatists, seems like a plain, every-day case of robbery.

Here is the story of it, and you can judge for yourselves.

Some German missionaries have been killed in China, and Germany has
seized a Chinese port in revenge.

Missionaries are, as you know, holy and devoted men who go to far
countries to spread the knowledge of the Gospel among heathen and
unenlightened people.

These good men have always suffered much for their faith. They go
wherever their duty calls, and even carry their message of peace to the
terrible cannibals who kill and eat men.

In the early annals of our own country we have records of the terrible
sufferings endured by these good men in their missionary work among the
redskins.

Missionaries count their perils and their privations as nothing if they
can but do the work of God.

Every government is particularly careful to do all that it can to
protect its missionaries, and if ignorant savages do them harm, an
attempt is always made to punish the wrongdoers, to teach them that
these servants of God are well protected.

The German Catholic Church some time ago established a mission in
Shantung Province, China. Recently the sad news was received in Berlin
that the mission at Yen Chu Fu had been attacked, and two missionaries
killed.

The shameful deed was at first attributed to pirates, but later it was
found that it had been planned by the governor of the province in
revenge for some old grievance.

Following this outrage came news that the captain of a German gunboat
had been attacked by a Chinese mob, which also insulted the German flag
by throwing stones at it.

The Government was extremely angry at this, and immediately demanded an
explanation from China.

The Chinese Government expressed its sorrow for the occurrence, and sent
orders to the governor of Shantung to arrest and punish the offenders.

Germany was informed of the action taken by the Chinese Government,
which, it is said, used all possible diligence and haste to bring the
offenders to justice; so much diligence, in fact, that on the 15th of
the month the governor of Shantung telegraphed that he had arrested four
of the culprits.

Germany, however, went right ahead in her own way, without paying any
heed to the efforts China was making to appease her; and to the intense
surprise of the world, simultaneously with the news of the arrests came
word that Germany had seized one of the Chinese harbors in the Yellow
Sea.

The Yellow Sea is on the east of China, and is formed by the peninsula
of Korea. Shantung, where the missionaries were killed, is a province
bordering on the Yellow Sea, and the fortified bay captured by the
Germans is called Kiao Chou, and is an excellent harbor on the Shantung
Coast, with the town of Kiao lying at its head.

This harbor was guarded by three forts, which were manned by fifteen
hundred Chinese soldiers.

Without word or warning the German admiral entered the bay, steamed up
opposite the forts, and ranged his ships in line of battle. He then sent
word to the Chinese commander that the three forts must be vacated
within three hours or he would bombard them.

The Chinese commander made no answer, so the German admiral proceeded to
land a force of men to take possession of the place.

The Chinamen watched the proceedings without making any demonstration,
and allowed the Germans to land six hundred soldiers and several guns
without making an effort to prevent them.

As soon, however, as the force began to march upon the forts, the
Chinese became panic-stricken, and fled helter-skelter to the hills.

The Germans marched into the forts in good order, and took possession of
them without striking a blow. They then hauled down the Chinese flag and
ran up their own in its place.

It was found that the Chinese commander and his family had not fled with
the rest of the garrison, and as these people promptly placed themselves
under the protection of Germany, there was no trouble with them.

The German soldiers proceeded to man the forts, and Germany is now in
possession of them. It is believed that she means to keep them.

China is justly indignant at this act on the part of Germany, and fully
realizes that she has good cause to declare war; but she is so weak in
military and naval force that she is not able to resent the outrage, and
the robbers are likely to be able to hold their prize.

Europe is astonished that Germany should have committed such a daring
act. It has been understood by all the European nations that when
savages misbehave, the only way to teach them manners is to step in and
seize their lands; but China is not a savage country, and the Chinese
cannot be treated like ignorant barbarians. Every one is wondering what
the outcome will be.

Germany evidently expects war, and is preparing for it. She has
withdrawn her troops from Crete, and has sent them to the East, it is
supposed to Kiao Chou.

You remember, of course, that when the Powers occupied Crete, each
nation in the combination landed a certain number of soldiers on the
island to help preserve peace.

Some of these soldiers have been at Crete ever since, and some have been
withdrawn. England called hers away some time since, and now Germany,
having use for her soldiers in China, has ordered hers to other duty.

It is said that the Emperor William has long desired to own a port in
China, and that he has used the murder of the missionaries as a pretext
to help him gain his ends.

We told you last week of his desire to increase the German navy. To
accomplish this, it will be necessary for him to do as other nations do,
that is, have ports all over the world where he can coal and repair his
ships. He has therefore looked with longing eyes on Kiao Chou.

This harbor is one of the best along the coast; so good, indeed, is it,
that Russia has been making offers to buy it. It has a great advantage
in being far away from the British and Russian ports, thereby
diminishing the chances of interference.

The Chinese have protested against Germany's unlawful act, and asked her
when she proposes to withdraw her troops, as they have secured the
offenders, and removed all cause of offence. Germany has made no reply,
so China fears she means to keep the harbor she has taken.

Many people believe that some such act has long been contemplated by the
Emperor.

China has, however, appealed to Russia for help, and as France and
England are equally interested in the matter, serious trouble may ensue.

Russia has more than doubled her fleet in the Yellow Sea, and has now
thirty-eight vessels in the neighborhood. England, France, and America
have also sent ships thither.

From the news as we know it, it seems as if Germany had committed a
very shameful act; but when we hear both sides of the question, we may
find that she has only done the right thing for the preservation of her
national honor.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Sultan of Turkey has been getting into trouble again. Both Russia
and Austria have been making things unpleasant for him.

Since his successes in the war he has begun to think himself a very
important sovereign, and both Russia and Austria decided that if he were
not checked he might become a very dangerous neighbor, so they met in
consultation, and laid their plans for checking his ambition.

They first incited Bulgaria to rebel.

Bulgaria is a small principality on the north of Turkey, which is under
the sovereignty of Turkey. Bulgaria enjoys home rule, and is governed by
a prince elected by the people; the prince must not, however, be a
member of any of the reigning families of Europe. Bulgaria is, however,
a tributary state, and has to contribute toward the support of Turkey.

Instigated by Austria and Russia, Bulgaria demanded several small favors
from the Sultan, insolently adding that if they were not granted she
would declare her independence and throw off the yoke of Turkey.

Now until the peace with Greece is absolutely signed and sealed, the
Sultan of Turkey cannot afford to quarrel with anybody, so he was
obliged to give in, and grant Bulgaria's demands; but her independence
made him feel somewhat uneasy and so he sent a number of soldiers to
the Bulgarian frontier, to make sure that the Bulgarians behaved.

This was exactly what Austria and Russia desired. With her troops
scattered, and uneasy nations on her borders, Turkey is much less
dangerous.

The Bulgarian matter had hardly been settled when Austria discovered a
new means of checking Turkey.

The Turkish officials in Asia Minor ill-treated an Austrian subject. He
was the agent of the Austrian Lloyd's Steamship Company at Mersina, and
had been summarily expelled from the city by order of the officials.

The Austrian consul at once interfered, and was grossly insulted by the
Mutessarif, who is a sort of mayor, and also by the Vali, or governor,
of Adana, in which province Mersina is situated. Adana is one of the
Turkish provinces on the Mediterranean Sea, and Mersina is one of its
chief seaport towns.

The incident being exactly what Austria had been wishing for, a great
deal was made of it. The Austrian ambassador at Constantinople sent word
that his flag had been insulted, and demanded that Turkey should
formally salute the Austrian flag, that both of the offending officials
must be immediately dismissed, and the agent given money damages.

The ambassador informed the Sultan that, in case of refusal, he should
leave Constantinople, and sever all diplomatic relations with Turkey,
and that warships should proceed to Mersina and bombard it.

The Sultan did not like to be treated in this way, and took time to
decide what he should do.

The ambassador sent a second letter, when he had waited as long as he
thought right for an answer to his first, with the added demand that
Turkey should also pay the claims of the Oriental Railroad Company, and
that the matter should be decided inside of eight days.

The claim of this railroad company was for carrying troops during the
war, and the bill for this service had not been paid.

Now the Oriental Railroad Company is not owned by Austria, but by
Austrian citizens, and it was an unheard-of thing for a government to
seek to collect the private debts of her citizens at the cannon's mouth.
Europe has, however, been doing remarkable things to Turkey for many
years past.

The Sultan dared not refuse Austria, any more than Bulgaria, until the
peace with Greece was signed, and so was forced to agree to all of
Austria's demands.

In six days he had made up his mind, and a polite message was sent by
the Porte (the Turkish Government) to Austria, that the ill-treatment of
the Austrian citizen was a matter of deep regret, and that the Porte
would pay the required money damages, would discharge the offending
officials, and send warships to salute the Austrian flag; and last, but
not least, the Porte would pay the railroad company's bill, which
amounted to the nice little sum of $1,250,000.

The letter concluded by stating that the Sultan desired the good will of
the Emperor of Austria, and hoped that nothing might intervene to
endanger it.

By this little action Austria and Russia succeeded in weakening Turkey
still more through her treasury; but even then they were not satisfied.

Russia had found out that the Sultan intended to spend part of the
indemnity Turkey was to obtain from Greece in strengthening his navy; in
fact, with Germany's help he meant to have the finest navy in the world.

This did not suit Russia at all. It became known that Germany had
arranged to supply Turkey with a perfectly equipped navy--guns,
equipment, and all complete--for one-quarter of the money coming from
Greece.

Turkey has been bankrupt for many years, and owes money to most of the
nations of Europe, so when Russia learned of this dangerous activity on
her part, she took advantage of the old debts to prevent it.

She sent word that if Turkey was in a position to buy a navy, she must
be also in a position to pay her debts, and therefore Russia would like
to have the old account of 1878 settled.

This is a war debt which Turkey owes Russia because of the last war
between them.

This debt is an extremely heavy one, and the Porte, becoming frightened
lest Russia should insist on its payment, hastened to inform the Czar
that nothing definite had been arranged about the navy.

Russia replied that the moment Turkey shall attempt to build up her navy
or increase her war supplies, she will insist on the payment of this
debt.

After a few days of reflection, the Porte informed the Russian
ambassador that Turkey had decided not to make any changes in her navy
for the present.

Between them, Austria and Russia have succeeded in crushing the Sultan's
ambition for the present.


       *       *       *       *       *

These are, however, not all of Abdul Hamid's troubles.

Crete, which he had begun to regard as his rightful property, has once
more become a thorn in his side.

Confident of his power, he has been assuming a haughty tone with the
Greek ambassador sent to settle the treaty, and insisted that he accept
the terms as they were without venturing on any changes. He has also
kept his soldiers in Crete, and sent a Turk as governor of the island
despite the protests of the Powers.

He has, in fact, been doing pretty much as he pleased, believing that
Europe was afraid of him, and that he was master of the situation.

Now the Powers have combined to teach him the difference. They have
joined together, and in round terms bidden him obey them or take the
consequences.

You remember that home rule was promised to Crete, and that (after the
peace negotiations were signed) the Sultan announced that he would see
about the reforms later.

The Powers have now sent word to him that home rule must be granted to
the island at once, the Turkish troops instantly withdrawn, and a
Christian governor appointed.

Word has been sent to Turkey that if she oppose the Powers they will
blockade Constantinople.

With all these different complications to harass him, Abdul Hamid cannot
be a very happy man.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is generally understood by those who make a study of such matters,
that the arrival of Weyler in Spain will be followed by serious trouble
for the Government.

It is well known that he is opposed to Sagasta's rule, and so the
Carlists, who would like to see Don Carlos on the throne, the
Republicans, who would like to abolish the throne altogether, and
several other lesser parties are approaching Weyler in the hope of
attaching him to their cause.

He has arrived in Barcelona, where he will remain for a few days, and
will then go on to Majorca, his birthplace.

Barcelona is known to be the headquarters of the Carlist revolution, and
though Weyler has implied that he belongs to neither Carlist nor
Republican party, his sojourn in Barcelona will give him ample time to
see how the land lies, and find out what profit there may be for him if
he joins the Carlists.

It is reported that he desires to form a party of his own, which shall
oppose home rule in Cuba, and uphold the kind of warfare that he waged
as the only means of saving the colony for Spain.

This is a clever idea of his, for he is likely to find many adherents
among the merchants, who are dissatisfied with Sagasta's plan for home
rule, and for giving the Cuban legislature the right to fix the tariff
on all goods sent into Cuba.

The merchants want the tariff arranged by Spain as it always has been,
and they want it so fixed that Cubans will be obliged to buy their
goods in Spain.

One of Cuba's greatest causes of complaint was the high tariff which
Spain imposed on all goods entering Cuba except those of Spanish
manufacture. This tariff made it impossible for Cubans to buy their
goods in any of the European markets, and compelled them to take the
class and quality of goods which Spain chose to send them, and to pay
whatever price Spain demanded for them.

Perhaps you will find this a little hard to understand, so we will try
to make it a little clearer to you.

All countries are anxious to find markets for the goods they produce. It
is for this reason that we have passed our present tariff bill.

The United States wishes to make a market for the goods manufactured
here, and so she has laid a heavy tariff or duty on all goods brought
into this country that are similar to those that we make here. A certain
fixed number of cents has to be paid for every pound, gallon, or yard of
such goods before they can be brought into the country.

The importers cannot, of course, afford to lose this money, and so they
have to add it to the price of the goods, which thus become more
expensive than the same class of articles manufactured here. It is
therefore to the housekeeper's advantage to buy home-made goods in
preference to foreign, and thus a market is made for the home products.

Spain considers her colonies her rightful market, and therefore has
placed a high duty on foreign goods. The Cuban housewives therefore
found it to their advantage to buy Spanish goods. Cuba is of course too
small an island to manufacture many things for herself.

This seemed fair enough, but unfortunately, the Spanish goods thus
forced on the Cubans were not satisfactory to them, and were, moreover,
sold at prices much too high for their value. The Cubans found that were
they allowed to go to the world's markets for their supplies, they could
live for half what it cost them under Spanish rule, and rebelled against
the power that was treating them so unfairly.

The question of tariff is said to be the most serious stumbling-block in
the way of home rule for Cuba. It has been said by both Spanish and
Cuban diplomats that, if it is enforced, the Spanish merchants will rise
in rebellion against the Government.

The Spanish ministers are, however, determined to carry home rule
through. The plan is now completed, and has been approved by the
ministers, received the Queen's signature, and become a law.

       *       *       *       *       *

The reassembling of Congress and the President's Message are drawing
near again.

People are speculating as to the course the President will recommend in
regard to Cuba and Hawaii.

It is thought that he will suggest patience toward Spain until the
promised reforms have had time to be put in effect, and that if these
reforms seem wise and just we shall not uphold the island in her
rebellion.

As to Hawaii, it seems a foregone conclusion that annexation will be
recommended, and will be an accomplished fact in a short space of time.

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Competitor_ prisoners have just landed in this country. The stories
they tell of the hardships they endured and the cruelties practised on
them are heartrending.

They declare that they were condemned to death without a hearing, and
were forced to choose a Spaniard to defend them at the mockery of a
trial which they were given.

This man laughed when they told him they were not guilty, and never
opened his lips to plead for them, or to ask that they be allowed to
make their own statements.

When they had been adjudged guilty he offered a half-hearted plea for
mercy.

They were so shockingly treated and so badly fed while in jail that they
have come back mere shadows of their former selves, and weak, lame, and
maimed.

       *       *       *       *       *

The result of the Cuban election has at last been made known, but we
find that the new president is not Capote after all, but Bartolome Maso.

The election should have taken place on the 2d of September, but owing
to the absence of several delegates it did not occur until early in
November.

Senor Mendez Capote presided over the meetings, and it was probably this
which made people think that he had been elected president.

The election was very orderly. Maso was elected president by a large
majority, and Capote vice-president. Maximo Gomez was made
commander-in-chief of the Cuban forces.

The fact that the election had been accomplished in such a peaceful
manner is considered a proof of the great strength of the revolution,
and has made a good impression on the world generally.

       *       *       *       *       *

Those dreadful Austrian deputies are still quarrelling!

The Reichsrath reassembled a few days ago, and continued to indulge in a
mild form of misbehavior, which suddenly developed into the most
shocking riot that has as yet occurred.

The old language question came up.

A number of petitions had been presented to the Parliament against the
decree making it necessary for officials in Bohemia to understand both
the German and Czech languages.

It was proposed, as these petitions were nearly all alike, that one
would be chosen from them and read to the House, and the others merely
accepted as reiterations of the same sentiments.

This project raised a most fearful outcry from the opposition, and was
the signal for such a scene of violence that the very visitors in the
galleries leaned over the railings and called shame on the deputies.

The President suspended the sitting, and then had to fly for his life,
for the deputies, angry that he should attempt to control them, made a
rush for his desk, calling him all the unpleasant names they could think
of.

The Bohemian deputy, Dr. Wolff, at once assumed the lead. He was the
first to reach the tribune or raised platform on which the President
sits, and seizing the bell which was placed on the table, he swung it
to and fro, shouting and screaming to make himself heard.

Then another deputy, deciding that he would like to have the bell, fell
upon Dr. Wolff, and a free fight began.

The deputies struck one another, tore one another's clothes, and at last
got out their pocket-knives and began to use them as daggers.

Some of the spectators rushed out for the police, and a few of the
members went in pursuit of the President, insisting that he should
return and quell the disturbance.

After much trouble he succeeded in restoring order, just as the police
appeared on the scene.

Dr. Wolff defied everybody and everything, and announced his intention
of coming to the next session with revolvers in his pockets.

A Cabinet council was called in the evening, and the idea of dissolving
the Parliament was openly discussed.

Even this did not frighten the crazy ruffians who form the Austrian
Parliament.

At the next session, doors had been erected and passages blocked, so
that the President could not be attacked on the tribune, and an attempt
made to get on with business.

The Government had been busy in the interval, and had prepared a motion
that all persons guilty of disorderly conduct in the Reichsrath should
be suspended for a certain number of days, and deprived of their pay for
that time.

The President read the motion, amid the howls of Wolff and his party.
It is said that the whole affair must have been arranged beforehand, for
not a word of the motion could be heard in the house. But all the same,
as the President ceased to speak, the supporters of the Government rose
as one man, and accepted the resolution.

You hardly need to be told what followed.

The ridiculous Dr. Wolff had been standing in front of the tribune with
a cab-whistle at his lips, on which he blew incessantly during the
reading of the resolution. When it was read and passed despite him, his
rage knew no bounds; he started to clamber over the obstructions, and
made for the President, followed by several other equally infuriated
members.

The President did not wait for them to reach him, but, seizing his bell,
fled in hot haste.

Count Badeni, who had been present, was also forced to flee, as the mob
of angry men sought to do him injury.

After an interval the President returned and adjourned the meeting, and
immediately on his withdrawal carpenters entered the hall and began to
build a high and strong fence around the unfortunate man's tribune.

Despite the rioting, the Government feels that it has at last got the
best of the unruly members. From now on they can be fined and suspended
and excluded from the Reichsrath until the sentence has expired.

It is to be hoped that the idiotic Dr. Wolff will be given a recess of
several weeks. He seems to need rest from his Parliamentary duties.

The unruly party, which is opposed to the Government, is infuriated at
the passing of the resolution.

They declare that it was a violation of their constitutional rights, and
a meeting was held to decide what they should do about it. Nothing was,
however, decided upon.

       *       *       *       *       *

A terrible fire has occurred in London during the past week.

It is the worst fire that has visited the city since the Great Fire in
1666, when the whole heart of the city was burned.

This fire, though it consumed 13,000 houses and laid waste 400 streets,
compelling 200,000 persons to camp out in the country, has always been
regarded as one of the greatest blessings London ever knew.

London had been visited by a terrible plague, and the city was built
with such cramped and narrow streets, the upper stories of the houses
projecting and nearly touching one another, that the infection was borne
from house to house, and it did not seem possible to stamp out the
disease, because there was no means of properly airing and purifying the
city.

The horrible disease would seem to have passed away, when suddenly there
would be a fresh outbreak, carrying off hundreds of victims, and
bringing terror into every heart again.

Then the great fire broke out. For four days it raged and consumed
everything in its path, but at the same time it so thoroughly purified
the city that the plague was stamped out for good and all.

The present fire occurred in the most crowded part of the city, in the
heart of the business quarter.

London is not laid out like an American city, in blocks and squares,
with broad straight avenues running for miles, crossed at regular
intervals with wide and open streets.

It is, in the older part, a network of narrow roadways, with courts and
alleys lying back of them. The streets turn and bend and twist and go in
every direction, and leading out of them are other little winding
streets. These side turnings are delightful for those who know London
well, because you can turn down here and up there, and cut off corners
this way and save miles that way, by threading through these strange
byways that lead in and out of the highways.

In case of fire, these time-saving lanes and alleys are most dangerous
to the welfare of the city, for they are very narrow, with houses on
either side, and flames can easily reach from one side of the street to
the other.

This is precisely what happened at the recent fire. It sprang from side
to side of these narrow ways, until much of the business portion of
London was in flames.

There has been a good deal of talk about this fire, because the first
engine did not reach the scene of the disaster until fifteen minutes
after the call had been sent, and it has been said that the English
firemen are not nearly so expert as the American.

It seems hardly fair to criticise the English firemen without knowing
the difficulties they had to contend with. Some of the streets through
which they had to drive are hardly wide enough for two vehicles to
pass, and the fire occurring at midday, all these ways were blocked with
carts.

The English firemen cannot drive as rapidly and recklessly as our
firemen do on our wide avenues, for any attempt at such driving would
mean certain destruction to engine and apparatus.

The English alarm system does not appear to be so perfect as ours, but
otherwise the same engines are used, and the department is finely
organized. The arrangement of the city is all that prevents them from
doing the quick and effective work that we can accomplish.

When a fire breaks out here, it is the duty of the person discovering it
to run to the nearest fire-alarm box, and, opening the box, pull down
the hook he will see inside. This causes a signal-number to appear on
the key-board in front of the operator at headquarters.

The number tells him the district in which the fire has occurred, and
with one touch of a telegraphic key he sends out an alarm to the
thirty-odd engine-houses in the neighborhood of the fire.

The pressure on the key at headquarters releases the horses in the
stalls of the various engine-houses. Instantly these clever beasts dash
out of their boxes and place themselves at the shafts, the collar clasps
around their necks and harnesses them to the engine; the men slide down
the poles to their places, the gates swing open, and the engine is out
and dashing along the road in less time than it takes to tell about it.

By the use of regularly appointed signals, the first fireman who arrives
at the fire can inform headquarters just how serious the fire is, and
whether more engines should be sent.

On one occasion a great fire broke out in the busy part of New York
city. It was a serious fire; and according to the records at
headquarters, in less than four minutes the first batch of engines had
arrived and three extra calls had been sent out, which were speeding
half the engines in the city to the scene of the fire.

It will interest you to know that the fire department of the city of New
York has reached such a degree of excellence that the risk of serious
damage and loss by fire has been greatly reduced, and, in consequence,
the insurance companies have lowered the rate of insurance; that is to
say, they do not charge people as much money to insure their property
this year as they did last year and have done for many years past.

       *       *       *       *       *

The anxiety about Professor Andree has increased. The steamer which left
Tromso, Norway, in search of the explorer has returned, and reports that
no traces of him could be found. Search parties were sent out in every
direction, but nothing could be discovered.

The vessel sailed on November 5th and returned on the 21st, and her crew
declare that a most vigilant search was made.

The vessel was sent in consequence of the report brought in by the
wrecked whalers that they had heard cries for help.

       *       *       *       *       *

A strange freak of nature is reported from Kansas.

The railroad station of Rozel, eighteen miles from Larned, has been
swallowed up.

When the people in the neighborhood went to bed at night, the station
was in its usual place; in the morning the station, two or three small
elevators, and a few other small buildings had disappeared.

Investigation proved that they had been swallowed up, and had
disappeared in a chasm.

The depth of this rent in the earth cannot be determined. The hole is
said to be about an acre in extent, of oblong shape, with walls reaching
straight down for seventy feet, at which depth the hole is filled with
dark, stagnant water, into which anything that is thrown immediately
sinks.

No lives were lost, as no one remains at the station over night.

The interest of the surrounding country is intense, and many theories
are advanced as to the cause of the catastrophe.

Some think that the station dropped into an immense cave, and others
that it was caused by the underflow of the Arkansas River, which is
overflowing its banks at the present time. Others think that this
section of Kansas is over an immense underground river or sea.

A similar accident occurred in Meade County, Kansas, ten years ago. A
section of land crossed by a public road disappeared in a single night,
leaving a chasm which is a notable landmark to-day.

       *       *       *       *       *

The plans for the Bronx Park Zooelogical Gardens in New York city have
been perfected, and are now before the Park Board for acceptance.

From all accounts, the new Zoo will be one of the finest animal gardens
in the world.

It will cover two hundred and sixty-one acres of land, and is to combine
picturesque scenery for the pleasure of the visitor, with roomy quarters
and as nearly natural conditions as possible for the animals.

The buffaloes are to have a huge field appropriated to their use, where
they can roam at will. The visitors who wish to see them must climb a
wooded hill, from which they can view the beasts without disturbing
them.

The lions and tigers are to have open cages, where they can romp and
play.

It is proposed to paint the walls that divide these cages one from
another with African landscapes, so that the captives may feel as much
at home as possible.

The monkeys in the new Zoo are to be accommodated with a little
artificial forest, where they can roam freely. The birds are to have a
huge tree-grown aviary, with bathing-ponds and every desired luxury.

The gardens being so large, and the extent of the domain of each class
of animals so spacious, it has been found necessary to arrange a means
for the visitors to see all the beauties of the Zoo without undue
fatigue.

It has therefore been decided to use electric motor-carriages throughout
the park. Two fine roadways are to be constructed, which are to meander
through the gardens, taking in all the buildings, ranges, animal
enclosures, and lakes and ponds.

One roadway is for vehicles going in one direction, and the other for
carriages going in the opposite way. By this means the visitors will be
able to see everything in the gardens without getting tired.

This must be a lesson taught by the World's Fair in Chicago. There you
had no choice between walking until you almost dropped from fatigue, or
being wheeled about (at ruinous expense) in an invalid-chair by a
stripling youth who would pant and perspire until stout and healthy
passengers felt in duty bound to get out and walk to save their
charioteer's further exertion.

                                                  G.H. ROSENFELD.




INVENTION AND DISCOVERY.


CURRYCOMB AND BRUSH COMBINED.--This is such a fine article for the
comfort of our animal friends that we cannot refrain from telling our
young readers about it.

[Illustration: Currycomb]

Many of you may have curried a horse, or stood by during the process,
and watched him shrug and twitch with pleasure as the little iron teeth
scratched his skin, and have seen his coat grow glossy and satiny as the
brush was applied as soon as the currying was over.

Now this operation is most delightful to a horse; it is to him what
taking a bath is to us; and properly done it makes him feel fresh and
vigorous and quite happy to do his master's work.

If it is not well done he feels restless and dirty, and the pores of his
skin become clogged, and the good horse gets sick.

Currying a horse is quite hard work, and lazy grooms do not like to do
it, and so they have invented a means of shirking the brushing which is
very unkind to the horse.

Every owner wishes to see his animals with glossy, shining coats, and so
bad grooms, to save the trouble of currying and brushing, will rub the
horse over with a cloth, dipped in kerosene. The coat will shine
beautifully, but the poor horse is made most uncomfortable.

The currycomb and brush prevents this wicked practice, by making the
cleaning of the horse so easy that it is not worth the laziest man's
while to oil the horse instead of currying him.

As you will see by the illustration, the currycomb has a dandruff brush
attached to its outer edge. As the comb is withdrawn the brush passes
over the skin that has been curried, brushes it clean of dandruff, and
makes it smooth and glossy. After one _good_ currying with this device
the nag is ready for harness, his coat sleek, shiny, and, above all,
clean.

You young people who are the happy owners of horses, must always make
sure that the gloss on your favorite's coat is the result of health and
cleanliness, and not kerosene.

       *       *       *       *       *

CAR-STEP.--This excellent device is the invention of a young lady of
Pittsfield, Illinois.

Every one who has travelled in Pullman cars knows the discomfort of that
last step before you reach the ground. It is true that the porter is
always waiting with a little wooden stool on which you step from the
high car-step above, but for old people or lame people or nervous people
there is always the dread that they may miss the little stool, and be
tumbled over on the platform.

This invention is to prevent any such difficulty.

The steps of the Pullman cars can only be a certain length, and must not
jut out beyond the sides of the car, otherwise they would be liable to
be torn off when the oar passes through tunnels or narrow places. It is
therefore impossible to have them built any longer than they are at
present. The new invention, however, adds a step without going beyond
the proper limit.

[Illustration: Car-step]

It is done in this way: The step is made of iron, and is joined to the
regular wooden steps by strong rods. When the train is in motion the
extra step folds under the car-step. When the train stops the porter
touches a lever, and down comes the extra step, making the descent from
the car as easy as walking downstairs.

It is a fine invention, and we hope soon to see it used on all Pullman
cars.

                                                          G.H.R.




BOOK REVIEWS.


There has just been published a collection of sketches and essays by
Charles Dickens which have hitherto been uncollected and none of which
has been reprinted in the United States. This cannot fail to be an
extremely interesting book to the great army of admirers of Dickens. His
books always bear the unmistakable imprint of the master, novelist's
mind--in his fun, satire, and humor going hand in hand, as well as in
his sincerity and interest in the poor. Everything that Dickens wrote
has upon it the mark of genius, and this book will come as a delight to
many.

("Old Lamps for New Ones, and Other Sketches and Essays," by Charles
Dickens. The New Amsterdam Book Company: 350 pages, cloth, $1.25.)




PRIZE CONTEST


Owing to the improper character of many of the prize contests which have
recently been offered by many papers and to the criticisms which have
been called forth by them, we have decided that it is best to withdraw
the contest begun in No. 55. We know that these contests are of great
interest to our readers, and hope that we shall be able to renew them in
the near future without subjecting ourselves to the risk of criticism
which so properly attaches to any of the prize contests being published.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Round World and What Is
Going On In It, Vol. 1, No. 57, December 9, 1897, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT ROUND WORLD AND ***

***** This file should be named 16192.txt or 16192.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/6/1/9/16192/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.(www.pgdp.net)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

