The Project Gutenberg eBook, A Jolly by Josh, by "Josh"


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: A Jolly by Josh


Author: "Josh"



Release Date: January 13, 2006  [eBook #17499]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A JOLLY BY JOSH***


E-text prepared by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier, and the Project Gutenberg
Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net/)



A JOLLY BY JOSH







Privately Printed

MCMII




    Dear Charlie,--Having a spare moment as I crossed the continent
    last time, I sat down in the rear end of a Lake Shore Limited
    train, and began to cast about me with a view to hitting upon some
    way of passing the time amicably with myself. As I looked about
    the car, I studied the faces and persons of my fellow-travellers,
    and found them uniformly uninteresting. My mind wandered from them
    out of the window, and I noted with a casual eye the advance
    civilization was making on both sides of the track. I began
    wandering vaguely from that back to the time when this was a
    trackless wilderness; and I pictured to myself the advent of the
    white man, and so on in an aimless sort of a way, from the
    beginning of our country until I reached the Declaration of
    Independence, the terms of which have always remained vividly
    impressed upon my mind.

    "Life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness!" That is what we are
    after. So it is. How ridiculous! Why don't we think of it oftener?
    How many of us are free? How many of us are happy? And,
    particularly, how many of us would be any happier if we got the
    things we want? What foolish wants we have, anyway! Almost
    everybody wants something they don't want.

    Just then my eye caught sight of the official stenographer
    advertised as free. To an economical soul like mine the
    opportunity of having a free stenographer for a day and a half was
    too good to let slip by. So, placing my chair up alongside of his,
    I took from my pocket a letter which I had just received from my
    nephew, who had been spending his vacation in the West, and which
    I had not known exactly how to answer.

    The train of thoughts in which I had indulged, and the peculiarly
    vacant condition of my mind, made the time favorable for expansion
    upon the theme which had occurred to me; and so I inflicted on the
    poor boy a long letter, or sermon, or essay, or whatever you may
    please to call it, which I am enclosing to you.

    I know that you are interested in topics of this sort, and so send
    it along with an apology for the amount of your valuable time
    which I am so wilfully wasting.

                                          Your old friend,
                                                             JOSH.




_Dear Tom_,--I have just received your letter, asking if you could bring a
pony back from Colorado. I answer most assuredly, "Yes"; that is, if you
want to! But do you want to? This question having occurred to my mind, and
perhaps not to yours, you must excuse my becoming a little long-winded if
I launch out on a train of ideas which has presented itself to my mind.

Let me briefly serve up the circumstances that surround you, and perhaps I
can paint them so that you will look at them from a new point of view.

You are eighteen years of age. You have lived surrounded by wealth and a
good deal of luxury; but the luxury in which you were lapped was the
comfort with which a man of great working brain, who has well earned the
right to spend freely, chose to take for his own rest and amusement,
knowing well the value of every cent he has spent or given away.

As the youngest of many sons, you have never had any responsibility; and
yet your parents have left you with a taste for all kinds of expensive
things, although, when you come to your money in a few years, you will
have enough to gratify only a small part of the tastes which you have
acquired. Nevertheless, the money to which you are heir, while
necessitating a lower rate of expenditures than that of the household you
have been brought up in, is sufficient to enable you to live under much
easier circumstances than most of your neighbors.

In fact, if many of your friends started life with the income that will be
yours, they would consider themselves decidedly rich, and would become,
for a time at least, very much happier.

It seems to me that the Declaration of Independence has put it pat when it
defines the principal object for which we strive as "LIFE, LIBERTY, AND
THE PURSUIT OF HAPPINESS."

This may seem wandering far from the question of a pony; but, if you have
patience and follow me closely, you will find the old man is not too far
from the point.

Now let us bear fully in mind that Life, Liberty, and Happiness are the
objects which we have in view. In the tangled complications of modern
existence one gets lost and bewildered, unless having very definitely in
mind the objects for which we are striving. We would be like a ship
drifting or sailing in a fog without a compass. We do not know whether we
are attaining and accomplishing, or losing ground, unless we have
definitely in mind an objective point or points with which to make
comparisons of our position at different times.

I do not hesitate to write freely that we are engaged in the pursuit of
happiness, even though shallow minds might take exceptions on the ground
of selfishness. This is not so, as to a properly constituted mind
happiness includes seeing others happy, and the greatest satisfaction
comes from making them so. I will therefore let the Declaration of
Independence stand for the present without amendment.

Let us begin by postulating a great degree of happiness for friend Harris,
who has a dear little wife, a small house, and twenty-five hundred per
year. He will have no vacations and several children; and though we see
him full of happiness now, and envy his good luck and all, yet we foresee
that in twenty years, even though his salary is doubled, he will have been
enabled to lay by nothing, and will have a little heart-burning at the
thought that he cannot give his three daughters the ball dresses and
jewels they see among their boon companions.

Thompy, who has four thousand now, is not quite as happy as Harris, and
complains a good deal of being poor. He is hard-working and progressive,
and will doubtless double his salary; while Perry who is getting ten
thousand, part as income from property and part as trustee of something or
other, is the poorest man I know. He has desires, tastes, and expensive
habits which would make fifteen thousand a year look small to him, and
can't get along without entertainments and personal expenses on a
considerably higher plane than he can now afford.

Where will you land? As you are heading now, you will never be an
earner--it is more likely that you will be a spender--of money. You have
been accustomed to lots of things you could not afford on ten thousand a
year. Of course, you can cut down to that figure; but where will it land
you when you are married and have three daughters to send into society?
You will be worse off than Harris or Thompy in spite of the fact that you
have twice as much as one and just as much as the other.

Here is a curious fact I noticed when in college. I was asked by the
manager of the crew to collect subscriptions for him, and I undertook the
job in the dormitory in which I lived. I often found that the richest men
were the poorest. They never had money with them, and, while they promised
large amounts, they seldom paid; while the men of moderate means seemed to
be the ones who would readily promise reasonable amounts, and then draw a
check for it the first time you asked them. I am stating these facts for
the purpose of drawing some conclusions; and I think you will agree with
me, particularly when I have proved them up by testing them from the other
side.

The obvious conclusion sounds almost like a platitude,--that it is not the
amount of money one has that increases one's happiness, but the use it is
put to and the attitude of mind you have toward your income and the life
you can lead with it.

Let us now apply this to your particular case, and draw some more
conclusions.

_A priori_, you would be dissatisfied because you will be unable to do the
things you have been accustomed to doing, and your attitude will be that
of a man who has to deny himself things he thinks he wants. You will then
cut down the rate of expenditure to within your income, as you have a
certain modicum of sense in regard to matters of this kind,--not acquired,
but inherited,--and permit yourself to spend freely up to your limits.
Observe the result:--

When at the end of ten years you are married, you will find there is no
increase in income, and you will have a lot of expensive tastes for things
which you have come to look upon as necessary; and the increased expenses
of a household will make you give up all sorts of personal comforts. This
will make you feel poor, much poorer than Harris, for instance. As your
children appear, they will in turn rob you of more of the things you have
been accustomed to. You will have to keep a family horse and a pony, and
give up trotters and boats.

I am not detailing these tragedies with the idea of painting a gloomy
future, but merely to illustrate a point of view,--a habit of mind. I
might say.

It becomes evident, then, that, in order to bring your mind to the point
of view that will make you happy, it would be well to study the case of
Harris, the happiest man you know. Perhaps you could manage to do
artificially, as it were, what nature or circumstances has done for him.
He had no prospects, but good health, good heart, and good mind. He was
perfectly delighted when he found he could earn twenty-five hundred
dollars a year, a larger sum than he had ever had; and he saved some and
spent some in new ways until he found, when he married, that his living
expenses consumed it all. His wife, expecting little, was pleased with all
she got; and, altogether, they seemed to get, in a large measure, the
objects for which we strove and fought the war of 1776.

From the start you were differently placed. You became accustomed to
gratifying your desires: you had little purpose in your actions; and,
accordingly, you have now the habit of looking on each wish, whether of
long standing or momentary, as something you might as well gratify.

My second conclusion I will jump to now, without filling in the
intermediate steps leading up to it; namely, that, to attain happiness, it
is necessary to cultivate the custom of restraining your impulse to
gratify your every desire.

To illustrate this, I will carry out my threat of proving it up from the
other side. You have often in your yachting experiences seen the yachts
belonging to the Goulds, Vanderbilts, and other men of great wealth. These
men feel it necessary to own ships almost as large and expensive to
operate as ocean steamers. They build houses that cost several hundreds of
thousands of dollars, and they give balls that would ruin men of moderate
wealth, while their weddings are likely to cost in the neighborhood of a
million dollars in decorations, gifts, and expenses. The deduction from
this is that the ability of man to spend is only limited by the length of
his purse, and a man's desire to spend has no such limits.

The conclusion to be drawn from this is that you have got to curb your
desires unless you are unusual in one of two respects, either in your
money-getting ability or in your lack of imagination for inventing new
desires. In any case _you_ can eliminate these possibilities. Now,
admitting that at some point you have got to curb your desires, why not do
it at a point near Harris's, which will leave you in a more comfortable
frame of mind in regard to your money matters, rather than Perry's, who
does not have all he wants, and is discontented, or Vanderbilt, who would
consider himself ruined if he had to live on ten thousand a year?

I know that you may think that you cannot come to Harris's point of view,
as your points of view have always been horizontally opposite, he looking
up to a sum upon which you look down. But never mind. I am suggesting that
we do reach that point, nevertheless, or, if not that point, that we shall
use our intellects, and, with a view to expediency, select a point it
would be wise to reach.

I assert that we have now an intellectual problem before us. The question
is what scale of expenditure we shall use and what proportion of our
desires, etc., shall we curb.

The usual hand-to-mouth method is to go ahead, do what we want until we
are "up against it" and have to economize, and then for a while do without
some of the more important things which we find we cannot afford, having
already spent our money on things of lesser importance. This is the lazy
man's way, the one who does not care to do his thinking, and chooses to
let circumstances make his course rather than wisdom.

The system seems to have some points of merit, and it is whispered that
even Uncle Sam has sometimes let his affairs be managed on this plan, but
that need not enter into this case; for you and I are both of us
intelligent beings, observers after a fashion, and we intend to plan
things out a bit and see what we can do with them, and perhaps see what
stuff this luck that people talk about is made of.

Let us see where we now stand. We have found that it is the attitude
toward your income, and the scale of living your income permits, that must
be regulated; that your desires, if all were granted, will soon grow to a
point far out of reach of your purse, no matter how rich you get; and,
therefore, that the intellectual problem is before us of picking out a
scale of living somewhere well within your present income and endeavoring
to attain an attitude of mind toward living on that scale which will make
you happy rather than discontented.

I know that you are thinking that I have forgotten the personal equation,
that I am arguing as if all people were of the same temperament,
forgetting that under given conditions one person would be happy and
another would not, and that you, with your varied interests and contented
disposition, would always find things to make you happy, even if you had
to give up many of the luxuries which you now enjoy. This is true, but you
must please note that I have not intimated that you couldn't; and, in
fact, the point of what I say rests on the assumption that you could.
Moreover, in regard to other people, you will notice that this letter is
not addressed to them; and, if any of them should happen to see it, they
can put on the garment if it fits, or they can leave it alone,--it is all
one to me.

But how can we bring this about? how tell what things you have been used
to keep and what to give up? how keen a desire it is well to quell, and
which ones? To reach this point, it is necessary to digress again in order
to find the element of the magic touchstone which will tell us whether the
thing we are looking at is made of gold or some baser metal.

You must first have a look at our objective points, and try to analyze
these a little bit. Life, Liberty, and Pursuit of Happiness. These are
somewhat intermingled, as we consider liberty an essence of happiness. We
also want health, and all that conduces thereto, particularly cleanliness
and exercise. We want a fair amount of amusement and a good amount of
work. We want the sense of being useful and the sense of being respected.
This people will accord us if we are striving to accomplish some of the
innumerable things which people want to have done. There is, of course, a
higher field for man's energy,--that of striving for things which mankind
ought to want for and doesn't; the position of the martyr or reformer, who
works for the welfare of the people and receives ill-treatment for it,
like Christ. But, while we all of us hope we would not be found wanting,
were the demand made, we cannot help joining with Kipling in the wish
"which I 'ope it won't 'appen to me."

Accordingly, while I am not blind to disagreeable but necessary
possibilities, you will see that, if I digress to satisfy each one of
them, I shall never reach the point, which no doubt in your mind by this
time is the end; and so you must not pick flaws if I make statements which
cover the probable, but not all the possible, contingencies.

We have found, then, that we want employment which will somehow add to the
welfare of the human race; and is not this well worth doing? If you make
something of that nature your object, and keep it fully before your mind,
how much better off you will be than if you have continually in mind your
own amusement, your own comfort! If you have your amusement as your life
object, you will soon become a bored man, whom nothing will amuse. If you
have comfort, you will be the discontented man who is never comfortable;
for you soon fix in your mind the ideal combination of temperature,
garment, palate, belly, and entertainment, and, seldom being able to get
them all at once, you will seldom quite reach your ideal.

You might remark that I have made the statement that employment in
something useful is the element of happiness; but I have not proved it by
reasoning, nor have I led up to it by any line of argument. Let it rest at
that. I shall let your intelligence and experience supply the proof that a
definite object of employment with something in view of interest and
benefit to the human race is, if not an essence of happiness, perhaps the
easiest way to obtain the elements of happiness; namely, an object for
yourself, a sense of usefulness, and the respect of your associates.

In addition to this, you must not be unpleasant to the senses. You must be
morally and physically clean. You must have good manners, which is mostly
being courteous and sympathetic and doing sundry social things according
to the social code which happens to be then in vogue. You must learn,
though it bores you as much as your Latin composition did, the proper way
to dress at various functions and to answer people's invitations and
generally do the correct thing.

It won't take long to learn these things; and you need not remember them,
as, if you once have in mind that there is a correct way of doing things,
you can always find out the particular one at issue by asking.

It seems to me that I can best illustrate my point by comparing you to a
tool, of which there are two ends,--the handle and the working or cutting
end.

It is your business for your first thirty years of existence to make as
good a tool of yourself as you can, and your business for the rest of your
life to do as much work as possible; that is, let the tool be used after
it is made. Thus, then, let us divide your experiences and acquirements
into the handle and the edge of your tool. The handle,--your manners,
education on general topics, such as history, literature, art, etc., your
habits of cleanliness, promptness, etc., and your physical ability,
health, etc.

Your edge is your special fitness for work; that is, your education,
experiences, aptness, power of concentration, and accomplishment.

Now I am going to ask you to keep this division clearly in mind, as I
think you will find in it many of the elements of the touchstone for which
we are looking.

I know the thought will have occurred to you that you do not know what you
will take up, and are in no position to tell what things will go to make
up the right sort of an edge; yet you will observe that you are, of
course, in the same position as other pieces of unshaped wood and steel,
and for your first ten years nothing is done except to shape you up
gradually, teaching you to speak and read, and generally getting house
broken. During your teens you are going to college, learning how to meet
with and talk to men, to be a gentleman and develop your muscles.
Incidentally, you pick up a little knowledge of what the world has been
doing.

Most of this you will forget; but, if you are wise, you will have drawn a
few conclusions and made some observations, one of which is that it was
mighty good of those old chaps who have been workers in the past to have
cleared such good roads for us in every direction, so that a fellow could
almost begin where they left off, when his handle is polished and he
starts cutting.

An important thing at this period is to get the handle evenly
balanced,--turned correct on centres, as they say; that is, not to get too
far out of the normal in any particular, such as dress, promptness,
profanity, or length of hair.

So much for the rounding of the handle; and now about the tool. At first,
by watching, handling, and careful work, you must begin to show the
quality and amount of metal you possess. Find out, as it were, by
tentative trials whether it is capable of good edge or not. In other
words, you want to find your bent and your abilities. To this end, if you
are naturally good at mathematics and have a scientific and inquiring turn
of mind, as you have, it is well to give it vent. Do not fear, for
instance, to spend your time and earnings on electrical apparatus or
studies and experiments in physical science. If you have a fondness and
desire for teaching or philosophy or accounting or trade, try to find out
the essential requisites of the particular one which interests you, and
follow up and acquire all the attainments which may be found useful. If
you wish to enter politics or the lecture field, learn to speak and
collect and classify your ideas when you are speaking and before people.

Let me summarize briefly the points that I have just covered.

You are now working for a definite object. You have money enough to do
more than you want to do at present; but, if you learn habits expensive
enough to spend the whole of it, you are going to be hard up when your
expenses increase, as they will if you marry or assume greater
responsibilities. Therefore, it is necessary for you to practise
self-denial and deny yourself wisely. We have seen that self-denial of
some sort is necessary to everybody who have not fixed their habits, and
by that I mean fixed their habits to such an extent that no change in
their circumstances will induce them to lead a more expensive life. It
becomes obvious that those who have fixed their habits on economical and
praiseworthy lines will not only be the wealthiest, but will be the people
who enjoy the most freedom. It is to them that wealth is a real blessing;
and it is they who make their wealth a blessing to others, always keeping
in mind the personal equation.

It is therefore up to you to choose habits and fix them, so they will
bring about the best result, and thus conduce to your happiness, the merit
of your actions, and the use of your money. How, then, among all the
opportunities which arise shall you choose, how tell which ones of the
luxuries to which you have been accustomed you shall discard?

We have several times spoken of the touchstone we were seeking, one that
will tell what actions are good and what bad, which desires to fulfil and
which to deny. We have now reached something pretty close to our
definition. Gratify those which contribute toward the success of the
object you have in mind: deny yourself those which are detrimental to it,
and which do not tend directly or indirectly toward its accomplishment.

We wish to attain the attitude of mind of a Stoic toward the first class
of desires, and that of a spendthrift almost toward the second. For
example, keep your personal comfort well in bounds, and train yourself to
disregard it entirely; otherwise, you may say farewell to freedom.

Be temperate in eating your food, drinking cold water, taking exposure, in
your hours and in general. For example, it is not a good plan to have too
much of anything which you like particularly. It immediately dulls the
sense of pleasure in that thing, and, raising the level of your likes to a
degree that makes you dislike some other thing, perhaps, which you liked
before, thus working a loss rather than a gain. Therefore, temperance,
which is synonymous of moderation, in my use of the word, is the wisest
thing you can practise. But be intemperate in the pursuit of your object.
Let no expense be too large to equip yourself physically or mentally for
your life's work, as, for example, to assure regular exercise, to cure any
physical imperfection or disease, or for the furtherance of any desire for
investigation on natural or scientific subjects or points of interest
allied to the thing which you are seeking to attain. There is no need of
moderation in labor, exposure, or discomfort. Thus you will eventually
reach your ends, and may obtain results at which people will stand amazed,
believing them to be beyond the range of possibilities, as they will not
know that for years a systematic preparation has been going on to prepare
yourself for this result.

As a boy, your desires have been limited by your opportunities. You have
had certain kinds of recreation provided for you which you have enjoyed.
Your expenditure of money has been limited by your purse, which will have
been small if your parents were wise; and your expenditure of time will
have been limited by the hours you have been unable to take from study,
which will also have been small.

At college your opportunities will have broadened, and you begin to have
something similar to the elective system. You can choose more freely how
to spend your time. Your development to this point, I have already said,
may be called the rounding of the handle; and your education will be
normal if you have average application, intelligence, and memory. During
college your future course will begin to shape itself, but before you fix
upon your definite object there is likely to be a period at which you can
be tempted into the greatest dissipation. By dissipation I do not mean the
accepted term, but the scientific use of the word; namely, the useless
expenditure of energy in futile pursuits. It is the opposite of
concentration, which means directing energy upon your object. To make
myself clearer, I will define energy as also meaning, in addition to your
labor, your money, as money is the accumulated energy of your ancestors,
just as coal is the accumulated energy of sunshine.

You must remember also that there is a certain amount of allowance to be
made for some rather indefinite objects, which are none the less
important, and which, for want of a better name, I shall call the Discard.
Among these can be named the education of the imagination, having a good
time generally, foolishness, mysticism, good fellowship, aesthetics,
humanity, and humanities in general. The fact that many a man has thrown
himself away by putting all his time into these things, and lived solely
for good fellowship, for foolishness, or for imagination without
attainment, is no reason why you should not partake in a small measure of
these qualities, which is like the wheel grease on the axle or the clown
in the circus. It is apt to be even more important yet, as it may prove to
be the road to friendship, societies, society, and love. Moreover, you
should not forget that, in the pursuit of your object, you must provide a
material recreation for yourself,--literature, music, art, billiards,
anything; something that will give you (and others, if possible) pleasure
and diversion, and render your happiness independent of your work, if for
any reason you are prevented from devoting your life to it.

We are now prepared to go over some of your pursuits with our touchstone,
and see which ones we can recommend and which we cannot, which of the
desires with which you are confronted or may be confronted are worth while
or worth the expenditure of energy.


FOOD?

You should make no stipulation about your food, except that it be
wholesome. The pleasantness of its taste in your mouth should have little
weight with you. If you confine yourself to just that food which you like,
and get so that your comfort depends on it, you will deliver over your
freedom just as though you delivered yourself to be bound hand and foot in
a dungeon. When the time comes that you must cut down your expenditure and
live less "well," you become unhappy, as you have taught yourself to look
upon all food with the idea that it should give you pleasure rather than
sustenance.


YACHTING?

By all means. It gives judgment, coolness, and readiness to face and
overcome danger, muscle, ozone, handiness of hands, steadiness of eye,
experience, and a sense of the depth and expanse of the ocean. By all
means, yachting, but not for the purpose of show, as giving orders before
other people, of taking dilatory trips in fair weather only, and lounging
in an easy-chair on the deck of some yacht while others take the
responsibility and do the work. While going to the expense of keeping a
boat, you should so mould your life as to use it constantly. If you keep a
boat on the off chance of wanting it every other week or just for the
sense of having it ready, you will make it an annoyance to yourself rather
than a pleasure. But here caution is recommended; and you should only keep
a yacht if you can do so well within your means, and thoroughly
understanding that some day you may have to give it up, and that you must
not think that a hardship.


CLOTHES?

Yes, but within bounds. You can always afford to pay more for clothes than
they are worth, and pay more attention to them also than they are worth;
but here again temperance is recommended.


HORSES?

Yes; that is, enough to learn to ride, to master your horse, develop your
muscle and _abandon_ and poise, but not enough to watch jockeys carrying
your colors or your coachman before you carrying your reins. Learn to
ride, learn to drive; but that does not mean necessarily that you had
better bring a pony back with you.


THEATRES?

Use theatres sparingly. They are perfect gluttons for time, and use up
money. But of these the more important is time, and they make desperate
inroads into the next day. So be temperate in theatres. Put part in for
education and part for the discard.


BOOKS?

By all means. Spare no money on them. Be a spendthrift for books. We can
always afford them; but pay for the printed matter, and not for the
covers. If you choose books wisely and know what is in them and where to
get at them when you want them, you can for a very small expense have a
mine of information and recreation at your elbow, which could make you the
best educated of men.


CLUBS?

Freely. It mostly goes to the discard; but you can afford that, provided
you are careful not to have too great a waste of time. There are more
opportunities lost inside of club walls than are gained.


CARDS?

There is no gain in gambling beyond the opportunity of watching the human
character, and, incidentally to develop it; but it is time lost, and
unworthily lost. The end does not justify the means. You had better play
and read and sleep rather than gamble.


WINE?

Yes and no. Always in moderation. Do not acquire the habit of drinking. It
is useless; and, after all that is said in favor of it by our mutual
friend, Omar, and others, I can never see that a man is worse off for
never having been drunk, and I am even Puritanical enough to think that he
is better off, and, moreover, he has more self-respect, to say nothing of
the respect of others. Nobody ever loses caste by refusing to drink. It is
a difficult thing to do sometimes; but you know the old adage, that any
man can lead a horse to water, but a hundred cannot make him drink. It is
a pity that men should be inferior to horses in that respect. You will
think that this is becoming a temperance lecture. Perhaps it is; but never
mind, it does not call for total abstinence.


TOBACCO?

I can see no advantage to be gained by tobacco; and you will find that it
administers to your comfort, and that is the only advantage that it has.
This in itself is a very damaging kind of an advantage, as, without
advancing your object, it endangers your freedom, as all comforts do.


ATHLETIC PROWESS?

By all means cultivate this and in every form possible, but even here have
an eye to moderation. Do not develop your heart and lungs to such an
extent that, when you have taken up a more sedentary life later, they will
suffer a reaction. Almost all the great athletes suffer a few years'
discomfort while adjusting themselves to a less athletic existence than
was theirs in college. Therefore, be moderate and specialize in this, so
that in after life you may do what you are best fitted for, and in the
attainment of athletic success make a test case of your proficiency of
attainment. Do not fear to be prodigal of energy concentrated on the right
thing.


FURNITURE?

In fixing up your room, your house, or personal surroundings, have good,
comfortable furniture for rest and for work, but not for show. Be simple,
even to the extent of being severe. The fewer things you have, the better
off you are. Shun all other possessions as the devil would holy water.
Have nothing that is not for a definite purpose and that you do not
actually use. The criterion to be applied to these is not what you can
find use for, but what you cannot get along without. A traveller who knows
his business can travel on very slender baggage, and be perfectly
comfortable and clean. Consider yourself a traveller through this world,
and study to cut down your baggage. Thus you will avoid dissipation, and
keep your freedom.


PICTURES?

Yes. Do not be afraid to cultivate the artistic. It is a card thrown to
the discard, but one which you cannot regret. Do not have too many. A
jumble of pictures is not what you want, but a few good ones. Only beware
lest a craze for expensive pictures overtake you, which would interfere
with your more definite object. If, however, your career lies in the line
of the artistic, the purchase and collection of fine pictures come well
within the golden things passed by our touchstone. Many men get a craze
after the futile,--a hobby it is usually called; and they will dissipate
great amounts of energy in collecting such things as postage-stamps,
post-marks, or some other object of little use, and at great expense of
time and money.

If you allow such things to distract your attention from your object, you
may lose it entirely, just as you lose sight of something in the hands of
a conjurer who has succeeded in directing your attention to something of
momentary interest. In this connection it is well to say that the habit of
spending must be avoided. Let a large expenditure be a circumstance. You
can afford, however, to spend money on charities even to the point of
dissipation. It is a cultivation of the heart. It might prove a career;
and so, before your object is chosen, you approach it, as a possibility,
afterward, as a card for the discard, in either case creditable.

There are other classes of desires which appeal to the sensuous and
sensual nature of man. Among these can be reckoned a taste for opium or
morphine, a taste for women, or for those kinds of literature and drama
which appeal to the sensuous nature. All these desires are like
drunkenness, in that no one is the better off for gratifying them.
Arguments of all sorts will be brought forward by men who have yielded to
these desires; but, while convincing the one who is eager to be convinced,
they are all of the negative sort,--they try to prove there is no reason
why they should not. Our touchstone will not pass any such arguments:
there must be positive reason why you should do a thing, otherwise do not
do it.

This may seem Puritanical, but let's be Puritans to a certain extent. Play
no games that are not distinctly winning games. There is a winning game to
be played. Why, then, play a game which is neither a winning nor a losing
game? It never gave me any pleasure to gamble with a machine or with
cards, because I know these to be losing games. The plan of the game is
always laid out so that the balance of chance is slightly against the
player, sometimes considerably against the player, else why should the
game be started?

We are left better off in no respect after all these desires are
gratified. We are poorer in money, in pocket, in self-respect, and often
in virtue.

We could go on so indefinitely through the list of all sorts of desires,
but I have only touched upon a few of the more crucial ones to show how
the touchstone should be applied; and even then results are crude, and
would be of little help to you in fixing on a low scale of expenditure.
They may, however, give you some ideas which will seem to guide you when
you come to meet the problems for yourself.

And now we come back to the original question, whether you really want a
pony. There are several really good ones in the stable that you can use.
You are to be away a large part of the year, and you have never made half
the use which you might have of your opportunities to ride.

I am, nevertheless, enclosing a check for the amount necessary to
purchase your pony, because at your age I took a trip through the Rocky
Mountains, which awakened in me a new desire for riding. It has proved my
greatest ally in the severe strains to which the pursuit of my object has
subjected me to, and because your ancestors have always kept their iron
constitutions into extreme old age by almost daily rides, and because the
sense of ownership of a horse may awaken in you the love and knowledge of
the animal, and may accomplish a similar happy result.

                                          Yours very truly,
                                                       UNCLE JOSH.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A JOLLY BY JOSH***


******* This file should be named 17499.txt or 17499.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/7/4/9/17499



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

