The Project Gutenberg eBook, False Friends, and The Sailor's Resolve, by
Unknown


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: False Friends, and The Sailor's Resolve

Author: Unknown

Release Date: December 31, 2004  [eBook #14543]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FALSE FRIENDS, AND THE SAILOR'S
RESOLVE***


E-text prepared by Sherry Hamby, Ted Garvin, Melissa Er-Raqabi, Jeannie
Howse, and the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team
(http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 14543-h.htm or 14543-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/4/5/4/14543/14543-h/14543-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/4/5/4/14543/14543-h.zip)





FALSE FRIENDS

THE SAILOR'S RESOLVE

1884







[Illustration: LADY GRANGE READING TO HER SON. _Page 19._]


[Illustration: A TALK ABOUT THE PICTURE. _Page 33._]




FALSE FRIENDS

     "Thorns and snares are in the way of the froward."--PROV. xxii. 5.

[Illustration: REFLECTION. _Page 25._]

"Philip, your conduct has distressed me exceedingly," said Lady Grange,
laying her hand on the arm of her son, as they entered together the
elegant apartment which had been fitted up as her boudoir. "You could
not but know my feelings towards those two men--I will not call them
gentlemen--whose company you have again forced upon me. You must be
aware that your father has shut the door of this house against them."

"My father has shut the door against better men than they are," said the
youth carelessly; "witness my own uncles Henry and George."

The lip of the lady quivered, the indignant colour rose even to her
temples; she attempted to speak, but her voice failed her, and she
turned aside to hide her emotion.

"Well, mother, I did not mean to vex you," said Philip, who was rather
weak in purpose than hardened in evil; "it _was_ a shame to bring Jones
and Wildrake here, but--but you see I couldn't help it." And he played
uneasily with his gold-headed riding-whip, while his eye avoided meeting
that of his mother.

"They have acquired some strange influence, some mysterious hold over
you," answered the lady. "It cannot be," she added anxiously, "that you
have broken your promise,--that they have drawn you again to the
gaming-table,--that you are involved in debt to these men?"

Philip whistled an air and sauntered up to the window.

Lady Grange pressed her hand over her eyes, and a sigh, a very heavy
sigh, burst from her bosom. Philip heard, and turned impatiently round.

"There's no use in making the worst of matters," said he; "what's done
can't be helped; and my debts, such as they are, won't ruin a rich man
like my father."

"It is not that which I fear," said the mother faintly, with a terrible
consciousness that her son,--her hope, her pride, the delight of her
heart,--had entered on a course which, if persevered in, must end in his
ruin both of body and soul. "I tremble at the thought of the misery
which you are bringing on yourself. These men are making you their
victim: they are blinding your eyes; they are throwing a net around you,
and you have not the resolution to break from the snare."

"They are very pleasant, jovial fellows!" cried Philip, trying to hide
under an appearance of careless gaiety the real annoyance which he felt
at the words of his mother.

"I've asked them to dine here to-day and--"

"I shall not appear at the table," said Lady Grange, drawing herself up
with dignity; "and if your father should arrive--"

"Oh! he won't arrive to-night; he never travels so late."

"But, Philip," said the lady earnestly again laying her cold hand on his
arm. She was interrupted by her wayward and undutiful son.

"Mother, there's no use in saying anything more on the subject; it only
worries you, and puts me out of temper. I can't, and I won't be uncivil
to my friends;" and turning hastily round, Philip quitted the apartment.

"Friends!" faintly echoed Lady Grange, as she saw the door close behind
her misguided son. "Oh!" she exclaimed, throwing herself on a sofa, and
burying her face, "was there ever a mother--ever a woman so unhappy as
I am!"

Her cup was indeed very bitter; it was one which the luxuries that
surrounded her had not the least power to sweeten. Her husband was a man
possessing many noble qualities both of head and heart; but the fatal
love of gold, like those petrifying springs which change living twigs
to dead stone, had made him hardened, quarrelsome, and worldly. It had
drawn him away from the worship of his God; for there is deep truth in
the declaration of the apostle, that the covetous man is _an idolater_.
It was this miserable love of gold which had induced Sir Gilbert to
break with the family of his wife, and separate her from those to whom
her loving heart still clung with the fondest affection. Lady Grange
yearned for a sight of her early home; but gold had raised a barrier
between her and the companions of her childhood. And what had the
possession of gold done for the man who made it his idol? It had put
snares in the path of his only son; it had made the weak-minded but
head-strong youth be entrapped by the wicked for the sake of his wealth,
as the ermine is hunted down for its rich fur. It had given to himself
heavy responsibilities, for which he would have to answer at the bar of
Heaven; for from him unto whom much has been given, much at the last day
will be required.

Yes, Lady Grange was very miserable. And how did she endeavour
to lighten the burden of her misery? Was it by counting over her
jewels,--looking at the costly and beautiful things which adorned her
dwelling,--thinking of her carriages and horses and glittering plate, or
the number of her rich and titled friends? No; she sought comfort where
Widow Green had sought it when her child lay dangerously ill, and there
was neither a loaf on her shelf nor a penny in her purse. The rich lady
did what the poor one had done,--she fell on her knees and with tears
poured out her heart to the merciful Father of all. She told him her
sorrows, she told him her fears; she asked him for that help which she
so much required. Her case was a harder one than the widow's. A visit
from the clergyman, a present from a benevolent friend, God's blessing
on a simple remedy, had soon changed Mrs. Green's sorrow into joy.
The anguish of Lady Grange lay deeper; her faith was more sorely tried;
her fears were not for the bodies but the souls of those whom she
loved;--and where is the mortal who can give us a cure for the disease
of sin?

While his mother was weeping and praying, Philip was revelling and
drinking. Fast were the bottles pushed round, and often were the glasses
refilled. The stately banqueting-room resounded with laughter and
merriment; and as the evening advanced, with boisterous song. It was
late before the young men quitted the table; and then, heated with wine,
they threw the window wide open, to let the freshness of the night air
cool their fevered temples.

Beautiful looked the park in the calm moonlight. Not a breath stirred
the branches of the trees, their dark shadows lay motionless on the
green sward: perfect silence and stillness reigned around. But the holy
quietness of nature was rudely disturbed by the voices of the revellers.

With the conversation that passed I shall not soil my pages. The window
opened into a broad stone balcony, and seating themselves upon its
parapet, the young men exchanged stories and jests. After many sallies
of so-called wit, Wildrake rallied Philip on the quantity of wine which
he had taken, and betted that he could not walk steadily from the one
end of the balcony to the other. Philip, with that insane pride which
can plume itself on being _mighty to mingle strong drink_, maintained
that his head was as clear and his faculties as perfect as though he had
tasted nothing but water; and declared that he could walk round the edge
of the parapet with as steady a step as he would tread the gravel-path
in the morning!

Wildrake laughed, and dared him to do it: Jones betted ten to one that
he could not.

"Done!" cried Philip, and sprang up on the parapet in a moment.

"Come down again!" called out Wildrake, who had enough of sense left to
perceive the folly and danger of the wager.

Philip did not appear to hear him. Attempting to balance himself by his
arms, with a slow and unsteady step he began to make his way along the
lofty and narrow edge.

The two young men held their breath. To one who with unsteady feet walks
the slippery margin of temptation, the higher his position, the greater
his danger; the loftier his elevation, the more perilous a fall!

"He will never get to the end!" said Jones, watching with some anxiety
the movements of his companion.

The words had scarcely escaped his lips when they received a startling
fulfilment. Philip had not proceeded half way along the parapet when a
slight sound in the garden below him attracted his attention. He glanced
down for a moment; and there, in the cold, clear moonlight, gazing
sternly upon him, he beheld his father! The sudden start of surprise
which he gave threw the youth off his balance,--he staggered back, lost
his footing, stretched out his hands wildly to save himself, and fell
with a loud cry to the ground!

All was now confusion and terror. There were the rushing of footsteps
hither and thither, voices calling, bells loudly ringing, and, above
all, the voice of a mother's anguish, piercing to the soul! Jones and
Wildrake hurried off to the stables, saddled their horses themselves,
and dashed off at full speed to summon a surgeon, glad of any excuse
to make their escape from the place.

The unfortunate Philip was raised from the ground, and carried into the
house. His groans showed the severity of his sufferings. The slightest
motion was to him torture, and an hour of intense suspense ensued before
the arrival of the surgeon. Lady Grange made a painful effort to be
calm. She thought of everything, did all that she could do for the
relief of her son, and even strove to speak words of comfort and hope
to her husband, who appeared almost stupified by his sorrow. Prayer was
still her support--prayer, silent, but almost unceasing.

The surgeon arrived,--the injuries received by the sufferer were
examined, though it was long before Philip, unaccustomed to pain and
incapable of self-control, would permit necessary measures to be taken.
His resistance greatly added to his sufferings. He had sustained a
compound fracture of his leg, besides numerous bruises and contusions.
The broken bone had to be set, and the pale mother stood by, longing, in
the fervour of her unselfish love, that she could endure the agony in
the place of her son. The pampered child of luxury shrank sensitively
from pain, and the thought that he had brought all his misery upon
himself by his folly and disobedience rendered it yet more intolerable.
When the surgeon had at length done his work, Lady Grange retired with
him to another apartment, and, struggling to command her choking voice,
asked him the question on the reply to which all her earthly happiness
seemed to hang,--whether he had hope that the life of her boy might be
spared.

"I have every hope", said the surgeon, cheerfully, "if we can keep down
the fever." Then, for the first time since she had seen her son lie
bleeding before her, the mother found the relief of tears.

Through the long night she quitted not the sufferer's pillow, bathing
his fevered brow, relieving his thirst, whispering comfort to his
troubled spirit. Soon after daybreak Philip sank into a quiet,
refreshing sleep; and Lady Grange, feeling as if a mountain's weight had
been lifted from her heart, hurried to carry the good news to her husband.

She found him in the spacious saloon, pacing restlessly to and fro. His
brow was knit, his lips compressed; his disordered dress and haggard
countenance showed that he, too, had watched the live-long night.

"He sleeps at last, Gilbert, thank God!" Her face brightened as she
spoke; but there was no corresponding look of joy on that of her husband.

"Gilbert, the doctor assures me that there is every prospect of our
dear boy's restoration!"

"And to what is he to be restored?" said the father gloomily; "to
poverty--misery--ruin!"

Lady Grange stood mute with surprise scarcely believing the evidence of
her senses almost deeming that the words must have been uttered in a
dream. But it was no dream, but one of those strange, stern realities
which we meet with in life. Her husband indeed stood before her a ruined
man! A commercial crash, like those which have so often reduced the rich
to poverty, coming almost as suddenly as the earthquake which shakes the
natural world, had overthrown all his fortune! The riches in which he
had trusted had taken to themselves wings and flown away.

Here was another startling shock, but Lady Grange felt it far less than
the first. It seemed to her that if her son were only spared to her, she
could bear cheerfully any other trial. When riches had increased, she
had not set her heart upon them; she had endeavoured to spend them as a
good steward of God and to lay up treasure in that blessed place where
there is no danger of its ever being lost. Sir Gilbert was far more
crushed than his wife was by this misfortune. He saw his idol broken
before his eyes, and where was he to turn for comfort? Everything upon
which his eye rested was a source of pain to him; for must he not part
with all, leave all in which his heart had delighted, all in which his
soul had taken pride? He forgot that poverty was only forestalling by a
few years the inevitable work of death!

The day passed wearily away. Philip suffered much pain, was weak and
low, and bitterly conscious how well he had earned the misery which he
was called on to endure. It was a mercy that he was experiencing, before
it was too late, that _thorns and snares are in the way of the froward_.
He liked his mother to read the Bible to him, just a few verses at a
time, as he had strength to bear it; and in this occupation she herself
found the comfort which she needed. Sir Gilbert, full of his own
troubles, scarcely ever entered the apartment of his son.

Towards evening a servant came softly into the sick-room, bringing
a sealed letter for her lady. There was no post-mark upon it, and
the girl informed her mistress that the gentleman who had brought
it was waiting in the garden for a reply. The first glance at the
hand-writing, at the well-known seal, brought colour to the cheek of
the lady. But it was a hand-writing which she had been forbidden to
read; it was a seal which she must not break! She motioned to the maid
to take her place beside the invalid who happened at that moment to be
sleeping and with a quick step and a throbbing heart she hurried away
to find her husband.

He was in his study, his arms resting on his open desk, and his head
bowed down upon them. Bills and papers, scattered in profusion on the
table, showed what had been the nature of the occupation which he had
not had the courage to finish. He started from his posture of despair
as his wife laid a gentle touch on his shoulder; and, without uttering
a word, she placed the unopened letter in his hand.

My reader shall have the privilege of looking over Sir Gilbert's
shoulder, and perusing the contents of that letter:--

     "Dearest Sister,--We have heard of your trials, and warmly
     sympathize in your sorrow. Let Sir Gilbert know that we have placed
     at his banker's, after having settled it upon you, double the sum
     which caused our unhappy differences. Let the past be forgotten;
     let us again meet as those should meet who have gathered together
     round the same hearth, mourned over the same grave, and shared joys
     and sorrows together, as it is our anxious desire to do now. I
     shall be my own messenger, and shall wait in person to receive your
     reply.--Your ever attached brother,

     "HENRY LATOUR."

A few minutes more and Lady Grange was in the arms of her brother; while
Sir Gilbert was silently grasping the hand of one whom, but for
misfortune, he would never have known as a friend.

All the neighbourhood pitied the gentle lady, the benefactress of the
poor, when she dismissed her servants, sold her jewels, and quitted
her beautiful home to seek a humbler shelter. Amongst the hundreds who
crowded to the public auction of the magnificent furniture and plate,
which had been the admiration of all who had seen them, many thought
with compassion of the late owners, reduced to such sudden poverty,
though the generosity of the lady's family had saved them from want
or dependence.

And yet truly, never since her marriage had Lady Grange been less an
object of compassion.

Her son was slowly but surely recovering, and his preservation from
meeting sudden death unprepared was to her a source of unutterable
thankfulness. Her own family appeared to regard her with even more
tender affection than if no coldness had ever arisen between them; and
their love was to her beyond price. Even Sir Gilbert's harsh, worldly
character, was somewhat softened by trials, and by the unmerited
kindness which he met with from those whom, in his prosperity, he
had slighted and shunned. Lady Grange felt that her prayers had been
answered indeed, though in a way very different from what she had hoped
or expected. The chain by which her son had been gradually drawn down
towards rum, by those who sought his company for the sake of his money,
had been suddenly snapped by the loss of his fortune. The weak youth
was left to the guidance of those to whom his welfare was really dear.
Philip, obliged to rouse himself from his indolence, and exert himself
to earn his living, became a far wiser and more estimable man than he
would ever have been as the heir to a fortune; and he never forgot the
lesson which pain, weakness, and shame had taught him,--that the way of
evil is also the way of sorrow. _Thorns and snares are in the way of
the froward._

    Who Wisdom's path forsakes,
      Leaves all true joy behind:
    He who the peace of others breaks,
      No peace himself shall find.
    Flowers above and thorns below,
    Little pleasure, lasting woe,--
    Such is the fate that sinners know!

    The drunkard gaily sings
      Above his foaming glass;
    But shame and pain the revel brings,
      Ere many hours can pass.
    Flowers above and thorns below,
    Little pleasure, lasting woe,--
    Such is the fate that sinners know!

    The thief may count his gains;--
      If he the sum could see
    Of future punishment and pains,
      Sad would his reckoning be!
    Flowers above and thorns below,
    Little pleasure, lasting woe,--
    Such is the fate that sinners know!

    The Sabbath-breaker spurns
      What Wisdom did ordain:
    God's rest to Satan's use he turns,--
      A blessing to a bane.
    Flowers above and thorns below,
    Little pleasure, lasting woe,--
    Such is the fate which sinners know!

    O Lord, to thee we pray;
      Do thou our faith increase;
    Help us to walk in Wisdom's way,--
      The only way of peace:
    For flowers above and thorns below,
    Little pleasure, lasting woe,--
    Such is the fate which sinners know!








THE SAILOR'S RESOLVE.

     "An angry man stirreth up strife, and a furious man aboundeth in
     transgression."--PROV. xxix. 22.

The old sailor Jonas sat before the fire with his pipe in his mouth,
looking steadfastly into the glowing coals. Not that, following a
favourite practice of his little niece, he was making out red-hot
castles and flaming buildings in the grate, or that his thoughts were in
any way connected with the embers: he was doing what it would be well if
we all sometimes did,--looking into himself, and reflecting on what had
happened in relation to his own conduct.

"So," thought he, "here am I, an honest old fellow,--I may say it, with
all my faults; and one who shrinks from falsehood more than from fire;
and I find that I, with my bearish temper, am actually driving those
about me into it--teaching them to be crafty, tricky, and cowardly! I
knew well enough that my gruffness plagued others, but I never saw how
it _tempted_ others until now; tempted them to meanness, I would say,
for I have found a thousand times that _an angry man stirreth up
strife_, and that a short word may begin a long quarrel. I am afraid
that I have not thought enough on this matter. I've looked on bad temper
as a very little sin, and I begin to suspect that it is a great one,
both in God's eyes and in the consequences that it brings. Let me see
if I can reckon up its evils! It makes those miserable whom one would
wish to make happy; it often, like an adverse gale, forces them to
back, instead of steering straight for the port. It dishonours one's
profession, lowers one's flag, makes the world mock at the religion
which can leave a man as rough and rugged as a heathen savage. It's
directly contrary to the Word of God,--it's wide as east from west of
the example set before us! Yes, a furious temper is a very evil thing;
I'd give my other leg to be rid of mine!" and in the warmth of his
self-reproach the sailor struck his wooden one against the hearth with
such violence as to make Alie start in terror that some fierce explosion
was about to follow.

"Well, I've made up my mind as to its being an evil--a great evil,"
continued Jonas, in his quiet meditation; "the next question is, how
is the evil to be got rid of? There's the pinch! It clings to one like
one's skin. It's one's nature,--how can one fight against nature? And
yet, I take it, it's the very business of faith to conquer our evil
nature. As I read somewhere, any dead dog can float with the stream;
it's the living dog that swims against it. I mind the trouble I had
about the wicked habit of swearing, when first I took to trying to serve
God and leave off my evil courses. Bad words came to my mouth as natural
as the very air that I breathed. What did I do to cure myself of that
evil? Why, I resolved again and again, and found that my resolutions
were always snapping like a rotten cable in a storm; and I was driven
from my anchorage so often, that I almost began to despair. Then I
prayed hard to be helped; and I said to myself, 'God helps those who
help themselves, and maybe if I determine to do something that I should
be sorry to do every time that an oath comes from my mouth, it would
assist me to remember my duty.' I resolved to break my pipe the first
time that I swore; and I've never uttered an oath from that day to this,
not even in my most towering passions! Now I'll try the same cure again;
not to punish a sin, but to prevent it. If I fly into a fury, I'll break
my pipe! There Jonas Colter, I give you fair warning!" and the old
sailor smiled grimly to himself, and stirred the fire with an air of
satisfaction.

Not one rough word did Jonas utter that evening; indeed he was
remarkably silent, for the simplest way of saying nothing evil, he
thought, was to say nothing at all. Jonas looked with much pleasure
at his pipe when he put it on the mantle-piece for the night. "You've
weathered this day, old friend," said he; "we'll be on the look out
against squalls to-morrow."

The next morning Jonas occupied himself in his own room with his phials,
and his nephew and niece were engaged in the kitchen in preparing for
the Sunday school, which their mother made, them regularly attend. The
door was open between the two rooms and as the place was not large,
Jonas heard every word that passed between Johnny and Alie almost as
well as if he had been close beside them.

_Johnny_. I say, Alie--

_Alie_. Please, Johnny, let me learn this quietly. If I do not know it
my teacher will be vexed. My work being behind-hand yesterday has put me
quite back with my tasks. You know that I cannot learn so fast as you do.

_Johnny_. Oh! you've plenty of time. I want you to do something for me.
Do you know that I have lost my new ball?

_Alie_. Why, I saw you take it out of your pocket yesterday, just after
we crossed the stile on our way back from the farm.

_Johnny_. That's it! I took it out of my pocket, and I never put it in
again. I want you to go directly and look for the ball. That stile is
only three fields off, you know. You must look carefully along the path
all the way; and lose no time, or some one else may pick it up.

_Alie_. Pray, Johnny, don't ask me to go into the fields.

_Johnny_. I tell you, you have plenty of time for your lessons.

_Alie_. It is not that, but--

_Johnny_. Speak out, will you?

_Alie_. You know--there are--cows!

Johnny burst into a loud, coarse laugh of derision. "You miserable
little coward!" he cried; "I'd like to see one chasing you round the
meadow! How you'd scamper! how you'd scream! rare fun it would be,--ha!
ha! ha!"

"Rare fun would it be, sir!" exclaimed an indignant voice, as Jonas
stumped from the next room, and, seizing his nephew by the collar of his
jacket, gave him a hearty shake; "rare fun would it be,--and what do you
call this? You dare twit your sister with cowardice!--you who sneaked
off yesterday like a fox because you had not the spirit to look an old
man in the face!--you who bully the weak and cringe to the strong!--you
who have the manners of a bear with the heart of a pigeon!" Every
sentence was accompanied by a violent shake, which almost took the
breath from the boy; and Jonas, red with passion, concluded his speech
by flinging Johnny from him with such force that, but for the wall
against which he staggered, he must have fallen to the ground.

The next minute Jonas walked up to the mantle-piece, and exclaiming, in
a tone of vexation, "Run aground again!" took his pipe, snapped it in
two, and flung the pieces into the fire! He then stumped back to his
room, slamming the door behind him.

"The old fury!" muttered the panting Johnny between his clenched teeth,
looking fiercely towards his uncle's room.

"To break his own pipe!" exclaimed Alie. "I never knew him do anything
like that before, however angry he might be!"

Johnny took down his cap from its peg, and, in as ill humour as can
well be imagined, went out to search for his ball. He took what revenge
he could on his formidable uncle, while amusing himself that afternoon
by looking over his "Robinson Crusoe." Johnny was fond of his pencil,
though he had never learned to draw; and the margins of his books were
often adorned with grim heads or odd figures by his hand. There was
a picture in "Robinson Crusoe" representing a party of cannibals,
as hideous as fancy could represent them, dancing around their fire.
Johnny diverted his mind and gratified his malice by doing his best so
to alter the foremost figure as to make him appear with a wooden leg,
while he drew on his head a straw hat, unmistakably like that of the old
sailor, and touched up the features so as to give a dim resemblance to
his face. To prevent a doubt as to the meaning of the sketch, Johnny
scribbled on the side of the picture,--

    "In search of fierce savages no one need roam;
    The fiercest and ugliest, you'll find him at home!"

He secretly showed the picture to Alie.

"O Johnny! how naughty! What would uncle say if he saw it?"

"We might look out for squalls indeed! but uncle never by any chance
looks at a book of that sort."

"I think that you had better rub out the pencilling as fast as you can,"
said Alie.

"Catch me rubbing it out!" cried Johnny; "it's the best sketch that ever
I drew, and as like the old savage as it can stare!"

Late in the evening their mother returned from Brampton, where she had
been nursing a sick lady. Right glad were Johnny and Alie to see her
sooner than they had ventured to expect. She brought them a few oranges,
to show her remembrance of them. Nor was the old sailor forgotten;
carefully she drew from her bag and presented to him a new pipe.

The children glanced at each other. Jonas took the pipe with a curious
expression on his face, which his sister was at a loss to understand.

"Thank'ee kindly," he said; "I see it'll be a case of--

    "'If ye try and don't succeed,
    Try, try, try again.'"

What he meant was a riddle to every one else present, although not to
the reader.

The "try" was very successful on that evening and the following day.
Never had Johnny and Alie found their uncle so agreeable. His manner
almost approached to gentleness,--it was a calm after a storm.

"Uncle is so very good and kind," said Alie to her brother, as they
walked home from afternoon service, "that I wonder how you can bear to
have that naughty picture still in your book. He is not in the least
like a cannibal, and it seems quite wrong to laugh at him so."

"I'll rub it all out one of these days," replied Johnny; "but I must
show it first to Peter Crane. He says that I never hit on a likeness: if
he sees that, he'll never say so again!"

The next morning Jonas occupied himself with gathering wild flowers and
herbs in the fields. He carried them into his little room, where Johnny
heard him whistling "Old Tom Bowling," like one at peace with himself
and all the world.

Presently Jonas called to the boy to bring him a knife from the kitchen;
a request made in an unusually courteous tone of voice, and with which,
of course, Johnny immediately complied.

He found Jonas busy drying his plants, by laying them neatly between the
pages of a book, preparatory to pressing them down. What was the terror
of Johnny when he perceived that the book whose pages Jonas was turning
over for this purpose was no other than his "Robinson Crusoe"!

"Oh! if I could only get it out of his hands before he comes to that
horrid picture! Oh! what shall I do? what shall I do?" thought the
bewildered Johnny. "Uncle, I was reading that book," at last he mustered
courage to say aloud.

"You may read it again to-morrow," was the quiet reply of Jonas.

"Perhaps he will not look at that picture," reflected Johnny. "I wish
that I could see exactly which part of the book he is at! He looks too
quiet a great deal for any mischief to have been done yet! Dear! dear!
I would give anything to have that 'Robinson Crusoe' at the bottom of
the sea! I do think that my uncle's face is growing very red!--yes! the
veins on his forehead are swelling! Depend on't he's turned over to
those unlucky cannibals, and will be ready to eat me like one of them!
I'd better make off before the thunder-clap comes!"

"Going to sheer off again, Master Johnny?" said the old sailor, in a
very peculiar tone of voice, looking up from the open book on which his
finger now rested.

"I've a little business," stammered out Johnny.

"Yes, a little business with me, which you'd better square before you
hoist sail. Why, when you made such a good figure of this savage, did
you not clap jacket and boots on this little cannibal beside him, and
make a pair of 'em 'at home'? I suspect you and I are both in the same
boat as far as regards our tempers, my lad!"

Johnny felt it utterly impossible to utter a word in reply.

"I'm afraid," pursued the seaman, closing the book, "that we've both had
a bit too much of the savage about us,--too much of the dancing round
the fire. But mark me, Jack,--we learn even in that book that a savage,
a cannibal _may_ be tamed; and we learn from something far better, that
principle,--the noblest principle which can govern either the young or
the old,--_may_, ay, and _must_, put out the fire of fierce anger in our
hearts, and change us from wild beasts to men! So I've said my say,"
added Jonas with a smile; "and in token of my first victory over my old
foe, come here, my boy, and give us your hand!"

"O uncle, I am so sorry!" exclaimed Johnny, with moistened eyes, as he
felt the kindly grasp of the old man.

"Sorry are you? and what were you on Saturday when I shook you as a cat
shakes a rat?"

"Why, uncle, I own that I was angry."

"Sorry now, and angry then? So it's clear that the mild way has the best
effect, to say nothing of the example." And Jonas fell into a fit of
musing.

All was fair weather and sunshine in the home on that day, and on many
days after. Jonas had, indeed, a hard struggle to subdue his temper, and
often felt fierce anger rising in his heart, and ready to boil over in
words of passion or acts of violence; but Jonas, as he had endeavoured
faithfully to serve his Queen, while he fought under her flag, brought
the same earnest and brave sense of duty to bear on the trials of daily
life. He never again forgot his resolution, and every day that passed
made the restraint which he laid upon himself less painful and irksome
to him.

If the conscience of any of my readers should tell him that, by his
unruly temper, he is marring the peace of his family, oh! let him not
neglect the evil as a small one, but, like the poor old sailor in my
story, resolutely struggle against it. For _an angry man stirreth up
strife, and a furious man aboundeth in transgression._

    There is sin in commencing strife;
      Sin in the thoughtless jest
        Or angry burst,
        Which awakens first
      The ire in a brother's breast!

    There is sin in stirring up strife,
      In fanning the smouldering flame,
        By scornful eye,
        Or proud reply,
      Or anger-stirring name.

    There is sin in keeping up strife,
      Dark, soul-destroying sin.
        Who cherishes hate
        May seek heaven's gate,
      But never can enter in.

    For peace is the Christian's joy,
      And love is the Christian's life;
        He's bound for a home
        Where hate cannot come,
      Nor the shadow of sin or strife!



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FALSE FRIENDS, AND THE SAILOR'S
RESOLVE***


******* This file should be named 14543.txt or 14543.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/4/5/4/14543



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

