Project Gutenberg's Songs, Sonnets & Miscellaneous Poems, by Thomas Runciman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Songs, Sonnets & Miscellaneous Poems

Author: Thomas Runciman

Release Date: February 4, 2005 [EBook #14906]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SONGS, SONNETS & MISCELLANEOUS POEMS ***




Produced by Steven Gibbs and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.




SONGS, SONNETS & MISCELLANEOUS POEMS

BY

THOMAS RUNCIMAN

PRIVATELY PRINTED

MCMXXII




INTRODUCTORY NOTE


Thomas Runciman was born in Northumberland in 1841, and died in London
in 1909. He was the second son of Walter Runciman of Dunbar and Jean
Finlay, his wife. In his youth he left the beautiful coast where his
father was stationed to go to school and work in Newcastle. Artists of
his name had been men of mark in Scotland, and as he had their strong
feeling for colour he was allowed for a time to become a pupil of
William Bell Scott, who was on the fringe of the Pre-Raphaelite
Movement. Throughout his life he painted portraits and landscapes, but
the latter were what he loved. His work was not widely known, for he had
a nervous contempt for Exhibitions, and the first collection of his
landscapes in water-colour and oil was opened to the public at a
posthumous exhibition in Newcastle in 1911. He travelled from time to
time, and enjoyed living on the banks of the Seine, and in other
beautiful regions abroad.

His poems were never offered for publication, although critical essays
of his appeared from time to time, as for instance in the "London" of
Henley and Stevenson. The Songs and Sonnets were written for his own
satisfaction, and were sent to a few faithful friends and to members of
his own family, who have allowed me to collect and print them. The
miscellaneous verses were in many instances found in letters, and others
written in high spirits were rescued after his death from sketch books
and scraps of paper by his daughter, Kate Runciman Sellers, and by his
friend, Edward Nisbet.

W.R.




SONGS




I.


    Though here fair blooms the rose and the woodbine waves on high,
    And oak and elm and bracken frond enrich the rolling lea,
    And winds as if from Arcady breathe joy as they go by,
    Yet I yearn and I pine for my North Countrie.

    I leave the drowsing south and in dreams I northward fly,
    And walk the stretching moors that fringe the ever-calling sea;
    And am gladdened as the gales that are so bitter-sweet go by,
    While grey clouds sweetly darken o'er my North Countrie.

    For there's music in the storms, and there's colour in the shades,
    And there's joy e'en in the sorrow widely brooding o'er the sea;
    And larger thoughts have birth among the moors and lowly glades
    And reedy mounds and sands of my North Countrie.




II.


    You who know what easeful arms
    Silence winds about the dead,
    Or what far-swept music charms
    Hearts that were earth-wearied;

    You who know--if aught be known
    In that everlasting Hush
    Where the life-born years are strewn,
    Where the eyeless ages rush,--

    Tell me, is it conscious rest
    Heals the whilom hurt of life?
    Or is Nirvana undistressed
    E'en by memory of strife?





III.

    _Metempsychosis._


    When Grief comes this way by
    With her wan lip and drooping eye,
    Bid her welcome, woo her boldly;
    Soon she'll look on thee less coldly.

    Her tears soon cease to flow.
    'Tis now not Grief but Joy we know;
    From her smiling face the roses
    Tell the glad metempsychosis.




IV.


        Life with the sun in it--
            Shaded by gloom!
        Life with the fun in it--
            Shadowed by Doom!

    Life with its Love ever haunted by Hate!
    Life's laughing morrows frowned over by Fate!
    Young Life's wild gladness still waylaid by Age!
    All its sweet badness still mocking the sage!
    What can e'er measure the joy of its strife?

        What boundless leisure
        Count the heaped treasure
        Of woe, that's the pleasure
        And beauty of Life?




V.


            Once as the aureole
            Day left the earth,
            Faded, a twilight soul,
            Memory, had birth:
    Young were her sister souls, Sorrow and Mirth.

            Dark mirrors are her eyes:
            Wherein who gaze
            See wan effulgencies
            Flicker and blaze--
    Lorn fleeting shadows of beautiful days.

            Scan those deep mirrors well
            After long years:
            Lo! what aforetime fell
            In rain of tears,
    In radiant glamour-mist now reappears.

            See old wild gladness
            Tamed now and coy;
            Grief that was madness
            Turned into joy.
    Fate cannot harry them now, nor annoy.

            Down from yon throbbing blue,
            Passionless, fair,
            Still faces look on you,
            Sunlit their hair,
    With a slow smile at your pleasure and care.

            Life and death murmurings
            From their lips go
            In vaster music-rings;
            Outward they flow,
    Tenderer, wilder, than songs that we know.




VI.


    My love's unchanged--though time, alas!
    Turns silver-gilt the golden mass
    Of flowing hair, and pales, I wis,
    The rose that deepened with that kiss--
    The first--before our marriage was.

    And though the fields of corn and grass,
    So radiant then, as summers pass
    Lose something of their look of bliss,
         My love's unchanged.

    Our tiny girl's a sturdy lass;
    Our boy's shrill pipe descends to bass;
    New friends appear, the old we miss;
    My _Love_ grows old ... in spite of this
         My love's unchanged.




VII.


    _A Gurly Breeze in Scotland._


    A gurly breeze swept from the pool
    The Autumn peace so blue and cool,
    Which all day long had dreamed thereon
    Of men and things aforetime gone,
    Their vanished joy, their ended dule:
    So glooms the sea, so sounds her brool,
    As from the East at eve comes on
        A gurly breeze.

    Sense yields to Fancy 'neath whose rule
    This inland scene is quickly full
    Of ocean moods wherein I con
    As in a picture; quickly gone.
    To what sweet use the mind may school
        A gurly breeze!




SONNETS




I.

    _A Hamadryad Dies._


    Low mourned the Oread round the Arcadian hills;
    The Naiad murmured and the Dryad moaned;
    The meadow-maiden left her daffodils
    To join the Hamadryades who groaned
    Over a sister newly fallen dead.
    That Life might perish out of Arcady
    From immemorial times was never said;
    Yet here one lay dead by her dead oak-tree.
    "Who made our Hamadryad cold and mute?"
    The others cried in sorrow and in wonder.
    "I," answered Death, close by in ashen suit;
    "Yet fear not me for this, nor start asunder;
    Arcadian life shall keep its ancient zest
    Though I be here. My name?--is it not Rest?"




II.


    _"Et in Arcadia ego ..."_


    "What traveller soever wander here
    In quest of peace and what is best of pleasure,
    Let not his hope be overcast and drear
    Because I, Death, am here to fix the measure
    Of life, even in blameless Arcady.
    Bay, laurel, myrtle, ivy never sere,
    And fields flower-decorated all the year,
    And streams that carry secrets to the sea,
    And hills that hold back something evermore
    Though wild their speech with clouds in thunder-roar,--
    Yea, every sylvan sight and peaceful tone
    Are thine to give thy days their purer zest.
    Let not the legend grieve thee on this stone.
    I Death am here. What then? My name is Rest."




III.


    Despairless! Hopeless! Quietly I wait
    On these unpeopled tracks the happy close
    Of Day, whose advent rang with noise elate,
    Whose later stage was quick with mirthful shows
    And clasping loves, with hate and hearty blows,
    And dreams of coming gifts withheld by Fate
    From morrow unto morrow, till her great
    Dread eyes 'gan tell of other gifts than those,
    And her advancing wings gloomed like a pall;
    Her speech foretelling joy became a dirge
    As piteous as pitiless; and all
    My company had passed beyond the verge
    And lost me ere Fate raised her blinding wings....
    Hark! through the dusk a bird "at heaven's gate sings."




IV.


    "Despairless? Hopeless? Join the cheerful hunt
    Whose hounds are Science, high Desires the steeds,
    And Misery the quarry. Use and Wont
    No help to human anguish bring, that bleeds
    For all two thousand years of Christian deeds.
    Let Use and Wont in styes still feed and grunt,
    Or, bovine, graze knee-deep in flowering meads.
    Mount! follow! Onward urge Life's dragon-hunt!"
    --So cries the sportsman brisk at break of day.
    "The sound of hound and horn is well for thee,"
    Thus I reply, "but I have other prey;
    And friendly is my quest as you may see.
    Though slow my pace, full surely in the dark
    I'll chance on it at last, though none may mark."




V.


    Hopeless! Despairless! like that Indian wise
    Free of desire, save no desire to know.
    To gain that sweet Nirvana each one tries,
    Thinks to assuage soul-wearing passion so.
    From the white rest, the ante-natal bliss,
    Not loth, the wondrous wondering soul awakes;
    Now drawn to that illusion, now to this,
    With gathering strength each devious pathway takes;
    Till at the noon of life his aims decline;
    Evermore earthward bend the tiring eyes,
    Evermore earthward, till with no surprise
    They see Nirvana from Earth's bosom shine.
    The still kind mother holds her child again
    In blank desirelessness without a stain.




VI.


    He comes to me like air on parching grass;
    His eyes are wells where truth lives, found at last;
    Summer is fragrant should he this way pass;
    His calm love is a chain that binds me fast....
    Yet often melancholy will forecast
    That time when I shall have grown old--when he--
    Still rapturous in his struggle with life's blast--
    Shall give a pitying side glance to me,
    Who skirt the fog-fringe of eternity,
    Straining mine eyes to catch what shadowy sign
    Of good or evil omen there may be,
    Yet no sure good nor evil can divine:
    Only some hints of doubtful sound and light,
    That lonelier leave the uncompanioned night.




VII.


    She scanned the record of Beethoven's thought,
    And made the dumb chords speak both clear and low,
    And spread the dead man's voice till I was caught
    Away, and now seemed long and long ago.
    Methought in Tellus' bosom still I lay,
    While centuries like steeds tramped overhead,
    To the wild rhythms that, by night and day,
    From nature and man's passions still are made.
    The music of their motion as they pranced
    Lulled me to flawless ease as of a God;
    Never upon me pain or pleasure chanced;
    Unknown the dew of bliss, or fate's hard rod.
    Thus dreamed I ... But I know our mother Earth
    Waits to give back the peace she reft at birth.





VIII.


    By mead and marsh and sandhill clad with bent,
    Soothed by the wistful musings of the wind
    That in scarce listening ears are mildly dinned,
    On plods the traveller till the day be spent,
    And day-dreams end in dreamless night at last.
    He hears, beyond the grey bent's silken waves,
    The foam-embroidered waters ever cast
    On sighing sands and into echoing caves.
    And from the west, where the last sunset glow
    Still lingers on the border hills afar,
    Come pastoral sounds, attenuate and low,
    Thence where the night shall bring, 'neath cloud and star,
    Silence to yearn o'er folk worn with day's strife,
    Lost in blank sleep to hope, regret, death, life.

    [_An alternative ending_:

    While from the West comes murmuring earthly noise,
    Sweet, slumberous, attenuate and afar;
    Sad sunglows in the border mountains poise,
    There where he knows to-night, mid cloud and star,
    Silence shall yearn o'er folk worn out with strife,
    Lost in blank sleep to hope, regret, death, life.]




MISCELLANEOUS POEMS




I.


    What though my voice cease like a moan o' the wind?
    Not the less shall I
    Cast on this life a kindly eye,
    Glad if through its mystery
    Faint gleams of love and truth glance o'er my mind.

    What though I end like a spring leaf shed on the wind?
    Restrained by pure-eyed Sorrow's hand,
    Lithe Joy through this wondrous land
    Leads me; nothing have I scanned
    Unmixed with good. Fate's sharpest stroke is kind.

    To me, thoughts lived of old anew are born
    From glances at the unsullied sea,
    Or breath of morning purity,
    From cloud or blown grass tossing free,
    Or frail dew quivering on leaf, rose or thorn.

    What though behind me all is mist and shade,
    Yet warmth of afterglow bathes all.
    Hallowed spirits move and call
    Each to me, a willing thrall,
    With kindly speech of mountain, plain or glade.

    Before me, through the veil that covers all,
    Rays of a vasty Dawn strike high
    To the zenith of the sky.
    Intense, yet low as true love's sigh,
    Prophetic voices to my spirit call.

    So, though my voice cease like a moan o' the wind,
    Not the less shall I
    Cast on life a kindly eye,
    Glad if through its mystery
    Stray gleams of love and truth illume my mind.





II.

    _An Afternoon Soliloquy._


    How good some years of life may be!
    Ah, once it was not guessed by me,
    Past years would shine, like some bright sea,
    In golden dusks of memory.

    Ere then the music of the dawn
    From me had long since surged away;
    And in the disillusioned day
    Of chill mid-life I plodded on.

    Anon a fuller music thrilled
    My world with meaning undertones,
    That elegized our vanished ones,
    And told how Lethe's banks are filled

    With wordless calm, and wistful rest,
    And sweet large silence, solemn sleep,
    And brooding shadows cool and deep,
    And grand oblivions, undistressed.

    No more 'twas "Lethe rolling doom,"
    But Lethe calling, "Come to me,
    And wash away all memory
    And taint of what precedes the tomb;

    And know the changeless afterthought,
    Half guessed, half named from age to age,
    Wherein I quench the flame and rage
    And sorrow with which life is fraught."





III.


    The Love that speaks in word and kiss,
    That dyes the cheek and fires the eye,
    Through surface signs of shallow bliss
    That, quickly born, may quickly die;
    Sweet, sweet are these to man and woman;
    Who thinks them poor is less than human.

    But I do know a quavering tone,
    And I do know lack-lustre eyes,
    Behind the which, dumb and alone,
    A stronger Love his labour plies:
    He cannot sing or dance or toy--
    He works and sighs for other's joy.

    In gloom he tends the growth of food,
    While others joy in sun and flowers:
    None knows the passion of his mood
    Save they who know what bitter hours
    Are his whose heart, alive to beauty,
    Yet dies to it and lives for duty.




IV.

    _Revoke Not._


    Long is it since they ceased to look on light,
    To thrill with hope in our fond human way.
    Why grudge them rest in their sweet ancient night,
          Ungrieved, if never gay,
          Eased from Life's sorry day?

    Is it because at times when storms subside
    Through which thou oarest Life's ill-fitted bark,
    Dreams rise, from sounds of lapping of the tide,
          To veil the daylight stark,
          Its anguish and its cark?

    What was their joy here? Absence of great pain?
    Some music in lamentings of the wind?
    The mystic whispers of the dripping rain?
          Sad yearnings toward their kind?
          Ruth for old loves that pined?

    For these would'st thou revoke their flawless rest?
    Restore hope unfulfilled which they knew here?
    Oh! well they fare, safe sheltered in that nest
          Of silence, far from fear,
          Their memory not yet sere.

    Take thou no joy in any passing dream
    Of revocation from their stainless state!
    Love them: haste on, till thou to others seem
          As these to thee--their mate,
          A waning name, a date!

    Till then, the low keen sound of Life's "Alas!"
    Change as thou canst to themes in every key,
    That so for thee and others time may pass
    Full of presagings of content to be
          Age-long in that far bourne,
          Till thought end, quite outworn.




V.

    _"And there shall be no night there and they
    need no candle, and neither light of the sun;
    for the Lord God giveth them Light."_


    Your place is Heaven, a stormless nightless home?
    Then we twain never more shall live together
    Such days of gladdest thought as here, whilom,
    We spent amid the change of earthly weather.

    No white young day like hope smiles in yon east,
    Or, westering, cleaves wild-omened scarlet glooms;
    No frosty breezes wreathe your woods in mist;
    No breaker o'er Heaven's glassy ocean booms.

    No scents of delved dewy soil arise;
    No storm-blue pall in state hangs hill or lea;
    No nightly seas swirl in grey agonies;
    Nor old Earth's sweet decays dye herb or tree.

    Do wan gold tints shot on the midnight air
    Herald the moon that loiters far away?
    Or moony sea-gleams peep and beckon there
    From sapphire dark or mystic silver grey?

    No, not the olden pleasure shall be there
    We knew, before the grass sprang o'er your breast;
    Yet that is yours which here hearts cannot share--
    Heaven's summer peace eterne and noonday rest.




VI.

    _Northumbria.--A Dirge._


    Dirge the sorrows by time made dim:
      _Seas are sullen in rain and mist._
    Regret the woes that behind us swim:
      _Sullen's the north and grey the east._

    Black boats speck the horizon's rim:
      _The north is heavy and grey the east._
    They plash to shore in unison grim:
      _The breakers roar through rain and mist._

    Ah! the ravening Dane of old!
      _Joys are born of time and sorrow._
    He was beautiful, cruel and bold:
      _Death yesterday is life to-morrow._

    The slain lie stark on bented mounds:
      _Winds are calling in rain and mist._
    There's blood and smoke and wide red wounds,
      And black boats make to north and east.

    Through murky weltering seas they row:
      _Dirge the eyes their deeds made dim._
    Wives at their conning smile and glow,
      And hail them on the horizon's rim.

    There's peace on low mounds and shallow dells,
      Yellow rag-wort and sea-reed grey,
    And thrumming and booming of village bells:
      _Dirge the lives of that faded day._




VII.

    _Merely Suburban._


    Dry light reverberates, colour withdrawing
    Into a sky so white, sight cannot follow it.
    While in the shadows cast, rich hues, intenser
    Far than in light spaces, offer me gladness.
    Sun reigns triumphantly, thinning all vapour
    Into translucency, through which the foliage
    Bears out in sparkles of full golden greenery.
    O'er this, short dashes of keen grey-green masses lie;
    Even the cooler tints, pitched in this higher key--
    Purpling and greening greys--are fierce as fires.
    All the vast universe lives in one beautiful
    Summer--made lambent light, offering gladness.
    Who can accept of it? Hearts where no echo rings
    Wildly recalling deeds done by old Destiny--
    Deeds of finality, darkening the spirit--
    Rousing the echoes of thought to reverberate
    Ever and ever "Alas!" evermore.

    Once in a burning day's brightness like this,
    Sad I awaited the quenching forever of
    Light that had mantled and flickered and ebbed out
    Unto some twilight of hope and of reason.
    Out of his own unto future time's darkness
    Wistfully gazed he, as one who unhelped floats,

    Swept by a current past land out to sea.
    He started alertly with laughter and mockery,
    Loud at its height with the rapture of contest.
    For him the light focusses now to one vision,
    Shot through its beautiful heart with black terror,
    Terror from weakness, remorse and leave-taking.
    To his scared eye the day's bitter brightness
    Circles about the dark doorway set open
    Awaiting his entrance ere shut to for ever.
    Ever he harkens to voices behind him
    Dolefully hinting defect and omission;
    Cruelly shouting: "This, this was the true path;
    Here greatness lay, by humility guarded,
    She whom thou soughtest through mountains of pride!
    What avails tenderness now so belated?
    What gaining love with no deed as its child?"
    Whitening intenselier ever to setting
    Down sank the last sun save one he should gaze on.
    In the next dawning, with dull apprehensiveness,
    Groped he mid recent and older remembrance,
    Mingled with mad vain desires for a helping hand;
    Then off reeled his soul from my speechless adieus.
    Once more the whole blaze triumphed through the welkin,
    Bitter in brightness in memory for ever.




VIII.

    _Whistler versus Ruskin Trial._


    Critic John cam here to view
            Ha, ha, the viewin' o't!
    Lindsay's picture shop bran new,
            Ha, ha, the viewin' o't!
    John, he cast his head fu' high,
    Looked asklent and unco' skeigh,
    Vowed he'd gar James stand abeigh:
            Ha, ha, the viewin' o't!

    John he nayther ramps nor roars,
            Ha, ha, the viewin' o't!
    Soft gans hame and writes in "Fors"--
            Ha, ha, the viewin' o't!
    Writes, and wi' ae critic-puff
    Blaws James oot, like can'le snuff:
    Sweers in Art he's just a muff!
            Ha, ha, the viewin' o't!

    Englan' heurs and rubs her ee,
            Ha, ha, the viewin' o't!
    "Just as I had guessed," quo' she:
            Ha, ha, the viewin' o't!
    No so James. He to the Judge
    Cries, "John he ca's my noketurns 'fudge':
    That's a lee--spoke in a grudge."
            Ha, ha, the viewin' o't!

    Ca' up Michael! Ca' up Moore!
            Ha, ha, the viewin' o't!
    Bring up Wills--he's kenned before!
            Ha, ha, the viewin' o't!
    Midmay Michael's ta'en his stan',
    Moore and Wills say Whistler' gran',
    Nae better work done in this lan':
            Ha, ha, the viewin' o't!

    Now bring Jones--let's hear his min':
            Ha, ha, the viewin' o't!
    Out spake he: "Jim's work's rale fine,"
            Ha, ha, the viewin' o't!
    "An' were't like Titian's here or mine,
    A' this or that, I'd no decline
    To say they're rather like muneshine."
            Ha, ha, the viewin' o't!

    Run in Frith. Says he: "Dear me!"
            Ha, ha, the viewin' o't!
    "For my pairt here's nowt like me:"
            Ha, ha, the viewin' o't!
    "Nothing is like nature here.
    Where's the detail roun' an' clear,
    Such as in my work appear?"
           Ha, ha, the viewin' o't!

    How it cam let lawyers tell:
            Ha, ha, the provin' o't!
    Jury bodies luik fu' swell:
            Ha, ha, the provin' o't!
    "John's no right, yet Jim's no wrang!
    Art's made of nocht but peut an' slang!
    Half a bawbee! Hame let's gang!"
            Ha, ha, the provin' o't!


    ONE HUNDRED & FIFTY COPIES OF THIS
      BOOK HAVE BEEN PRINTED BY HAND
         FOR THE RIGHT HONOURABLE
            WALTER RUNCIMAN AT
             THE TEMPLE SHEEN
               PRESS  MARCH
                 MCMXXII





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Songs, Sonnets & Miscellaneous Poems
by Thomas Runciman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SONGS, SONNETS & MISCELLANEOUS POEMS ***

***** This file should be named 14906.txt or 14906.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/4/9/0/14906/

Produced by Steven Gibbs and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
