The Project Gutenberg EBook of Bill's Paper Chase, by W.W. Jacobs

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Bill's Paper Chase
       Lady of the Barge and Others, Part 3.

Author: W.W. Jacobs

Release Date: April 22, 2004 [EBook #12123]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BILL'S PAPER CHASE ***




Produced by David Widger




THE LADY OF THE BARGE

AND OTHER STORIES

By W. W. Jacobs




BILL'S PAPER CHASE


Sailormen 'ave their faults, said the night watchman, frankly.  I'm not
denying of it.  I used to 'ave myself when I was at sea, but being close
with their money is a fault as can seldom be brought ag'in 'em.

I saved some money once--two golden sovereigns, owing to a 'ole in my
pocket.  Before I got another ship I slept two nights on a doorstep and
'ad nothing to eat, and I found them two sovereigns in the lining o' my
coat when I was over two thousand miles away from the nearest pub.

I on'y knew one miser all the years I was at sea.  Thomas Geary 'is name
was, and we was shipmates aboard the barque _Grenada,_ homeward bound from
Sydney to London.

Thomas was a man that was getting into years; sixty, I think 'e was, and
old enough to know better.  'E'd been saving 'ard for over forty years,
and as near as we could make out 'e was worth a matter o' six 'undered
pounds.  He used to be fond o' talking about it, and letting us know how
much better off 'e was than any of the rest of us.

We was about a month out from Sydney when old Thomas took sick.  Bill
Hicks said that it was owing to a ha'penny he couldn't account for; but
Walter Jones, whose family was always ill, and thought 'e knew a lot
about it, said that 'e knew wot it was, but 'e couldn't remember the name
of it, and that when we got to London and Thomas saw a doctor, we should
see as 'ow 'e was right.

Whatever it was the old man got worse and worse.  The skipper came down
and gave 'im some physic and looked at 'is tongue, and then 'e looked at
our tongues to see wot the difference was.  Then 'e left the cook in
charge of 'im and went off.

The next day Thomas was worse, and it was soon clear to everybody but 'im
that 'e was slipping 'is cable.  He wouldn't believe it at first, though
the cook told 'im, Bill Hicks told him, and Walter Jones 'ad a
grandfather that went off in just the same way.

"I'm not going to die," says Thomas "How can I die and leave all that
money?"

"It'll be good for your relations, Thomas," says Walter Jones.

"I ain't got any," says the old man.

"Well, your friends, then, Thomas," says Walter, soft-like.

"Ain't got any," says the old man ag'in.

"Yes, you 'ave, Thomas," says Walter, with a kind smile; "I could tell
you one you've got."

Thomas shut his eyes at 'im and began to talk pitiful about 'is money and
the 'ard work 'e'd 'ad saving of it.  And by-and-by 'e got worse, and
didn't reckernise us, but thought we was a pack o' greedy, drunken
sailormen.  He thought Walter Jones was a shark, and told 'im so, and,
try all 'e could, Walter couldn't persuade 'im different.

He died the day arter.  In the morning 'e was whimpering about 'is money
ag'in, and angry with Bill when 'e reminded 'im that 'e couldn't take it
with 'im, and 'e made Bill promise that 'e should be buried just as 'e
was.  Bill tucked him up arter that, and when 'e felt a canvas belt tied
round the old man's waist 'e began to see wot 'e was driving at.

The weather was dirty that day and there was a bit o' sea running,
consequently all 'ands was on deck, and a boy about sixteen wot used to
'elp the steward down aft was lookin' arter Thomas.  Me and Bill just run
down to give a look at the old man in time.

"I am going to take it with me, Bill," says the old man.

"That's right," says Bill.

"My mind's--easy now," says Thomas.  "I gave it to Jimmy--to--to--throw
overboard for me."

"Wot?" says Bill, staring.

"That's right, Bill," says the boy.  "He told me to.  It was a little
packet o' banknotes.  He gave me tuppence for doing it."

Old Thomas seemed to be listening.  'Is eyes was open, and 'e looked
artful at Bill to think what a clever thing 'e'd done.

"Nobody's goin'-to spend-my money," 'e says.  "Nobody's"

We drew back from 'is bunk and stood staring at 'im.  Then Bill turned to
the boy.

"Go and tell the skipper 'e's gone," 'e says, "and mind, for your own
sake, don't tell the skipper or anybody else that you've thrown all that
money overboard."

"Why not?"  says Jimmy.

"Becos you'll be locked up for it," says Bill; "you'd no business to do
it.  You've been and broke the law.  It ought to ha' been left to
somebody."

Jimmy looked scared, and arter 'e was gone I turned to Bill, and I looks
at 'im and I says "What's the little game, Bill?"

"_Game_?"  said Bill, snorting at me.  "I don't want the pore boy to get
into trouble, do I?  Pore little chap.  You was young yourself once."

"Yes," I says; "but I'm a bit older now, Bill, and unless you tell me
what your little game is, I shall tell the skipper myself, and the chaps
too.  Pore old Thomas told 'im to do it, so where's the boy to blame?"

"Do you think Jimmy did?"  says Bill, screwing up his nose at me.  "That
little varmint is walking about worth six 'undered quid.  Now you keep
your mouth shut and I'll make it worth your while."

Then I see Bill's game.  "All right, I'll keep quiet for the sake of my
half," I says, looking at 'im.

I thought he'd ha' choked, and the langwidge 'e see fit to use was a'most
as much as I could answer.

"Very well, then," 'e says, at last, "halves it is.  It ain't robbery
becos it belongs to nobody, and it ain't the boy's becos 'e was told to
throw it overboard."

They buried pore old Thomas next morning, and arter it was all over Bill
put 'is 'and on the boy's shoulder as they walked for'ard and 'e says,
"Poor old Thomas 'as gone to look for 'is money," he says; "wonder
whether 'e'll find it!  Was it a big bundle, Jimmy?"

"No," says the boy, shaking 'is 'ead.  "They was six 'undered pound notes
and two sovereigns, and I wrapped the sovereigns up in the notes to make
'em sink.  Fancy throwing money away like that, Bill: seems a sin, don't
it?"

Bill didn't answer 'im, and that afternoon the other chaps below being
asleep we searched 'is bunk through and through without any luck, and at
last Bill sat down and swore 'e must ha' got it about 'im.

We waited till night, and when everybody was snoring 'ard we went over to
the boy's bunk and went all through 'is pockets and felt the linings, and
then we went back to our side and Bill said wot 'e thought about Jimmy in
whispers.

"He must ha' got it tied round 'is waist next to 'is skin, like Thomas
'ad," I says.

We stood there in the dark whispering, and then Bill couldn't stand it
any longer, and 'e went over on tiptoe to the bunk ag'in.  He was
tremblin' with excitement and I wasn't much better, when all of a sudden
the cook sat up in 'is bunk with a dreadful laughing scream and called
out that somebody was ticklin' 'im.

I got into my bunk and Bill got into 'is, and we lay there listening
while the cook, who was a terrible ticklish man, leaned out of 'is bunk
and said wot 'e'd do if it 'appened ag'in.

"Go to sleep," says Walter Jones; "you're dreamin'.  Who d'you think
would want to tickle you?"

"I tell you," says the cook, "somebody come over and tickled me with a
'and the size of a leg o' mutton.  I feel creepy all over."

Bill gave it up for that night, but the next day 'e pretended to think
Jimmy was gettin' fat an' 'e caught 'old of 'im and prodded 'im all over.
He thought 'e felt something round 'is waist, but 'e couldn't be sure,
and Jimmy made such a noise that the other chaps interfered and told Bill
to leave 'im alone. For a whole week we tried to find that money, and
couldn't, and Bill said it was a suspicious thing that Jimmy kept aft a
good deal more than 'e used to, and 'e got an idea that the boy might ha'
'idden it somewhere there.  At the end of that time, 'owever, owing to
our being short-'anded, Jimmy was sent for'ard to work as ordinary
seaman, and it began to be quite noticeable the way 'e avoided Bill.

At last one day we got 'im alone down the fo'c'sle, and Bill put 'is arm
round 'im and got im on the locker and asked 'im straight out where the
money was.

"Why, I chucked it overboard," he says.  "I told you so afore.  What a
memory you've got, Bill!"

Bill picked 'im up and laid 'im on the locker, and we searched 'im
thoroughly.  We even took 'is boots off, and then we 'ad another look in
'is bunk while 'e was putting 'em on ag'in.

"If you're innercent," says Bill, "why don't you call out?--eh?"

"Because you told me not to say anything about it, Bill," says the boy.
"But I will next time.  Loud, I will."

"Look 'ere," says Bill, "you tell us where it is, and the three of us'll
go shares in it.  That'll be two 'undered pounds each, and we'll tell you
'ow to get yours changed without getting caught.  We're cleverer than you
are, you know."

"I know that, Bill," says the boy; "but it's no good me telling you lies.
I chucked it overboard."

"Very good, then," says Bill, getting up.  "I'm going to tell the
skipper."

"Tell 'im," says Jimmy.  "I don't care."

"Then you'll be searched arter you've stepped ashore," says Bill, "and
you won't be allowed on the ship ag'in.  You'll lose it all by being
greedy, whereas if you go shares with us you'll 'ave two 'undered
pounds."

I could see as 'ow the boy 'adn't thought o' that, and try as 'e would 'e
couldn't 'ide 'is feelin's.  He called Bill a red-nosed shark, and 'e
called me somethin' I've forgotten now.

"Think it over," says Bill; "mind, you'll be collared as soon as you've
left the gangway and searched by the police."

"And will they tickle the cook too, I wonder?"  says Jimmy, savagely.

"And if they find it you'll go to prison," says Bill, giving 'im a clump
o' the side o' the 'ead, "and you won't like that, I can tell you."

"Why, ain't it nice, Bill?"  says Jimmy, holding 'is ear.

Bill looked at 'im and then 'e steps to the ladder.  "I'm not going to
talk to you any more, my lad," 'e says.  "I'm going to tell the skipper."

He went up slowly, and just as 'e reached the deck Jimmy started up and
called 'im.  Bill pretended not to 'ear, and the boy ran up on deck and
follered 'im; and arter a little while they both came down again
together.

"Did you wish to speak to me, my lad?"  says Bill, 'olding 'is 'ead up.

"Yes," says the boy, fiddling with 'is fingers; "if you keep your ugly
mouth shut, we'll go shares."

"Ho!"  says Bill, "I thought you throwed it overboard!"

"I thought so, too, Bill," says Jimmy, very softly, "and when I came
below ag'in I found it in my trousers pocket."

"Where is it now?"  says Bill.

"Never mind where it is," says the boy; "you couldn't get it if I was to
tell you.  It'll take me all my time to do it myself."

"Where is it?"  says Bill, ag'in.  "I'm goin' to take care of it.  I
won't trust you."

"And I can't trust you," says Jimmy.

"If you don't tell me where it is this minute," says Bill, moving to the
ladder ag'in, "I'm off to tell the skipper.  I want it in my 'ands, or at
any rate my share of it.  Why not share it out now?"

"Because I 'aven't got it," says Jimmy, stamping 'is foot, "that's why,
and it's all your silly fault.  Arter you came pawing through my pockets
when you thought I was asleep I got frightened and 'id it."

"Where?"  says Bill.

"In the second mate's mattress," says Jimmy.  "I was tidying up down aft
and I found a 'ole in the underneath side of 'is mattress and I shoved it
in there, and poked it in with a bit o' stick."

"And 'ow are you going to get it?"  says Bill, scratching 'is 'ead.

"That's wot I don't know, seeing that I'm not allowed aft now," says
Jimmy.  "One of us'll 'ave to make a dash for it when we get to London.
And mind if there's any 'ankypanky on your part, Bill, I'll give the show
away myself."

The cook came down just then and we 'ad to leave off talking, and I could
see that Bill was so pleased at finding that the money 'adn't been thrown
overboard that 'e was losing sight o' the difficulty o' getting at it.
In a day or two, 'owever, 'e see it as plain as me and Jimmy did, and, as
time went by, he got desprit, and frightened us both by 'anging about aft
every chance 'e got.

The companion-way faced the wheel, and there was about as much chance o'
getting down there without being seen as there would be o' taking a man's
false teeth out of 'is mouth without 'is knowing it.  Jimmy went down one
day while Bill was at the wheel to look for 'is knife, wot 'e thought
'e'd left down there, and 'ed 'ardly got down afore Bill saw 'im come up
ag'in, 'olding on to the top of a mop which the steward was using.

We couldn't figure it out nohow, and to think o' the second mate, a
little man with a large fam'ly, who never 'ad a penny in 'is pocket,
sleeping every night on a six 'undered pound mattress, sent us pretty
near crazy.  We used to talk it over whenever we got a chance, and Bill
and Jimmy could scarcely be civil to each other.  The boy said it was
Bill's fault, and 'e said it was the boy's.

"The on'y thing I can see," says the boy, one day, "is for Bill to 'ave a
touch of sunstroke as 'e's leaving the wheel one day, tumble 'ead-first
down the companion-way, and injure 'isself so severely that 'e can't be
moved.  Then they'll put 'im in a cabin down aft, and p'raps I'll 'ave to
go and nurse 'im.  Anyway, he'll be down there."

"It's a very good idea, Bill," I says.

"Ho," says Bill, looking at me as if 'e would eat me.  "Why don't you do
it, then?"

"I'd sooner you did it, Bill," says the boy; "still, I don't mind which
it is.  Why not toss up for it?"

"Get away," says Bill.  "Get away afore I do something you won't like,
you blood-thirsty little murderer."

"I've got a plan myself," he says, in a low voice, after the boy 'ad
'opped off, "and if I can't think of nothing better I'll try it, and
mind, not a word to the boy."

He didn't think o' nothing better, and one night just as we was making
the Channel 'e tried 'is plan.  He was in the second mate's watch, and
by-and-by 'e leans over the wheel and says to 'im in a low voice, "This
is my last v'y'ge, sir."

"Oh," says the second mate, who was a man as didn't mind talking to a man
before the mast.  "How's that?"

"I've got a berth ashore, sir," says Bill, "and I wanted to ask a favour,
sir."

The second mate growled and walked off a pace or two.

"I've never been so 'appy as I've been on this ship," says Bill; "none of
us 'ave.  We was saying so the other night, and everybody agreed as it
was owing to you, sir, and your kindness to all of us."

The second mate coughed, but Bill could see as 'e was a bit pleased.

"The feeling came over me," says Bill, "that when I leave the sea for
good I'd like to 'ave something o' yours to remember you by, sir.  And it
seemed to me that if I 'ad your--mattress I should think of you ev'ry
night o' my life."

"My wot?" says the second mate, staring at 'im. "Your mattress, sir,"
says Bill.  "If I might make so bold as to offer a pound for it, sir.  I
want something wot's been used by you, and I've got a fancy for that as a
keepsake." The second mate shook 'is 'ead.  "I'm sorry, Bill," 'e says,
gently, "but I couldn't let it go at that."

"I'd sooner pay thirty shillin's than not 'ave it, sir," says Bill,
'umbly.

"I gave a lot of money for that mattress," says the mate, ag'in.  "I
forgit 'ow much, but a lot.  You don't know 'ow valuable that mattress
is."

"I know it's a good one, sir, else you wouldn't 'ave it," says Bill.
"Would a couple o' pounds buy it, sir?"

The second mate hum'd and ha'd, but Bill was afeard to go any 'igher.  So
far as 'e could make out from Jimmy, the mattress was worth about
eighteen pence--to anybody who wasn't pertiklar.

"I've slept on that mattress for years," says the second mate, looking at
'im from the corner of 'is eye.  "I don't believe I could sleep on
another.  Still, to oblige you, Bill, you shall 'ave it at that if you
don't want it till we go ashore?"

"Thankee, sir," says Bill, 'ardly able to keep from dancing, "and I'll
'and over the two pounds when we're paid off.  I shall keep it all my
life, sir, in memory of you and your kindness."

"And mind you keep quiet about it," says the second mate, who didn't want
the skipper to know wot 'e'd been doing, "because I don't want to be
bothered by other men wanting to buy things as keepsakes."

Bill promised 'im like a shot, and when 'e told me about it 'e was nearly
crying with joy.

"And mind," 'e says, "I've bought that mattress, bought it as it stands,
and it's got nothing to do with Jimmy.  We'll each pay a pound and halve
wot's in it."

He persuaded me at last, but that boy watched us like a cat watching a
couple of canaries, and I could see we should 'ave all we could do to
deceive 'im.  He seemed more suspicious o' Bill than me, and 'e kep'
worrying us nearly every day to know what we were going to do.

We beat about in the channel with a strong 'ead-wind for four days, and
then a tug picked us up and towed us to London.

The excitement of that last little bit was 'orrible.  Fust of all we 'ad
got to get the mattress, and then in some way we 'ad got to get rid o'
Jimmy.  Bill's idea was for me to take 'im ashore with me and tell 'im
that Bill would join us arterwards, and then lose 'im; but I said that
till I'd got my share I couldn't bear to lose sight o' Bill's honest face
for 'alf a second.

And, besides, Jimmy wouldn't 'ave gone.

All the way up the river 'e stuck to Bill, and kept asking 'im wot we
were to do.  'E was 'alf crying, and so excited that Bill was afraid the
other chaps would notice it.

We got to our berth in the East India Docks at last, and arter we were
made fast we went below to 'ave a wash and change into our shoregoing
togs.  Jimmy watched us all the time, and then 'e comes up to Bill biting
'is nails, and says:

"How's it to be done, Bill?"

"Hang about arter the rest 'ave gone ashore, and trust to luck," says
Bill, looking at me.  "We'll see 'ow the land lays when we draw our
advance."

We went down aft to draw ten shillings each to go ashore with.  Bill and
me got ours fust, and then the second mate who 'ad tipped 'im the wink
followed us out unconcerned-like and 'anded Bill the mattress rolled up
in a sack.

"'Ere you are, Bill," 'e says.

"Much obliged, sir," says Bill, and 'is 'ands trembled so as 'e could
'ardly 'old it, and 'e made to go off afore Jimmy come on deck.

Then that fool of a mate kept us there while 'e made a little speech.
Twice Bill made to go off, but 'e put 'is 'and on 'is arm and kept 'im
there while 'e told 'im 'ow he'd always tried to be liked by the men, and
'ad generally succeeded, and in the middle of it up popped Master Jimmy.

He gave a start as he saw the bag, and 'is eyes opened wide, and then as
we walked forward 'e put 'is arm through Bill's and called 'im all the
names 'e could think of.

"You'd steal the milk out of a cat's saucer," 'e says; "but mind, you
don't leave this ship till I've got my share."

"I meant it for a pleasant surprise for you, Jimmy," says Bill, trying to
smile.

"I don't like your surprises, Bill, so I don't deceive you," says the
boy.  "Where are you going to open it?"

"I was thinking of opening it in my bunk," says Bill.  "The perlice might
want to examine it if we took it through the dock.  Come on, Jimmy, old
man."

"Yes; all right," says the boy, nodding 'is 'ead at 'im.  "I'll stay up
'ere.  You might forget yourself, Bill, if I trusted myself down there
with you alone.  You can throw my share up to me, and then you'll leave
the ship afore I do.  See?"

"Go to blazes," says Bill; and then, seeing that the last chance 'ad
gone, we went below, and 'e chucked the bundle in 'is bunk.  There was
only one chap down there, and arter spending best part o' ten minutes
doing 'is hair 'e nodded to us and went off.

Half a minute later Bill cut open the mattress and began to search
through the stuffing, while I struck matches and watched 'im.  It wasn't
a big mattress and there wasn't much stuffing, but we couldn't seem to
see that money.  Bill went all over it ag'in and ag'in, and then 'e stood
up and looked at me and caught 'is breath painful.

"Do you think the mate found it?" 'e says, in a 'usky voice.

We went through it ag'in, and then Bill went half-way up the fo'c's'le
ladder and called softly for Jimmy.  He called three times, and then,
with a sinking sensation in 'is stummick, 'e went up on deck and I
follered 'im.  The boy was nowhere to be seen.  All we saw was the ship's
cat 'aving a wash and brush-up afore going ashore, and the skipper
standing aft talking to the owner.

We never saw that boy ag'in.  He never turned up for 'is box, and 'e
didn't show up to draw 'is pay.  Everybody else was there, of course, and
arter I'd got mine and come outside I see pore Bill with 'is back up
ag'in a wall, staring 'ard at the second mate, who was looking at 'im
with a kind smile, and asking 'im 'ow he'd slept.  The last thing I saw
of Bill, the pore chap 'ad got 'is 'ands in 'is trousers pockets, and was
trying 'is hardest to smile back.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Bill's Paper Chase, by W.W. Jacobs

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BILL'S PAPER CHASE ***

***** This file should be named 12123.txt or 12123.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/2/1/2/12123/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


