The Project Gutenberg EBook of Odd Man Out, by W.W. Jacobs

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Odd Man Out
       Sailor's Knots, Part 6.

Author: W.W. Jacobs

Release Date: January 22, 2004 [EBook #10786]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ODD MAN OUT ***




Produced by David Widger




SAILORS' KNOTS

By W.W. Jacobs


1909



ODD MAN OUT


The night watchman pursed up his lips and shook his head.  Friendship, he
said, decidedly, is a deloosion and a snare.  I've 'ad more friendships
in my life than most people--owing to being took a fancy to for some
reason or other--and they nearly all came to a sudden ending.

[Illustration: "Friendship, he said, decidedly, is a deloosion and a
snare."]

I remember one man who used to think I couldn't do wrong; everything I
did was right to 'im; and now if I pass 'im in the street he makes a face
as if he'd got a hair in 'is mouth.  All because I told 'im the truth one
day when he was thinking of getting married.  Being a bit uneasy-like in
his mind, he asked me 'ow, supposing I was a gal, his looks would strike
me.

It was an orkard question, and I told him that he 'ad got a good 'art and
that no man could 'ave a better pal.  I said he 'ad got a good temper and
was free with 'is money.  O' course, that didn't satisfy 'im, and at last
he told me to take a good look at 'im and tell him wot I thought of 'is
looks.  There was no getting out of it, and at last I 'ad to tell him
plain that everybody 'ad diff'rent ideas about looks; that looks wasn't
everything; and that 'andsome is as 'andsome does.  Even then 'e wasn't
satisfied, and at last I told 'im, speaking as a pal to a pal, that if I
was a gal and he came along trying to court me, I should go to the police
about it.

I remember two young fellers that was shipmates with me some years ago,
and they was such out-and-out pals that everybody called 'em the Siamese
twins.  They always shipped together and shared lodgings together when
they was ashore, and Ted Denver would no more 'ave thought of going out
without Charlie Brice than Charlie Brice would 'ave thought of going out
without 'im.  They shared their baccy and their money and everything
else, and it's my opinion that if they 'ad only 'ad one pair o' boots
between 'em they'd 'ave hopped along in one each.

They 'ad been like it for years, and they kept it up when they left the
sea and got berths ashore.  Anybody knowing them would ha' thought that
nothing but death could part 'em; but it happened otherwise.

There was a gal in it, of course.  A gal that Ted Denver got into
conversation with on top of a bus, owing to her steadying 'erself by
putting her hand on 'is shoulder as she passed 'im.  Bright, lively sort
o' gal she seemed, and, afore Ted knew where he was, they was talking
away as though they 'ad known each other for years.

Charlie didn't seem to care much for it at fust, but he didn't raise no
objection; and when the gal got up to go he stopped the bus for 'er by
poking the driver in the back, and they all got off together.  Ted went
fust to break her fall, in case the bus started off too sudden, and
Charlie 'elped her down behind by catching hold of a lace collar she was
wearing.  When she turned to speak to 'im about it, she knocked the
conductor's hat off with 'er umbrella, and there was so much
unpleasantness that by the time they 'ad got to the pavement she told
Charlie that she never wanted to see his silly fat face agin.

"It ain't fat," ses Ted, speaking up for 'im; "it's the shape of it."

"And it ain't silly," ses Charlie, speaking very quick; "mind that!"

"It's a bit o' real lace," ses the gal, twisting her 'ead round to look
at the collar; "it cost me one and two-three only last night."

"One an' _wot?_"  ses Charlie, who, not being a married man, didn't
understand 'er.

"One shilling," ses the gal, "two pennies, and three farthings.  D'ye
understand that?"

"Yes," ses Charlie.

"He's cleverer than he looks," ses the gal, turning to Ted.  "I s'pose
you're right, and it is the shape after all."

Ted walked along one side of 'er and Charlie the other, till they came to
the corner of the road where she lived, and then Ted and 'er stood there
talking till Charlie got sick and tired of it, and kept tugging at Ted's
coat for 'im to come away.

"I'm coming," ses Ted, at last.  "I s'pose you won't be this way
to-morrow night?"  he ses, turning to the gal.

"I might if I thought there was no chance of seeing you," she ses,
tossing her 'ead.

"You needn't be alarmed," ses Charlie, shoving in his oar; "we're going
to a music-'all to-morrow night."

"Oh, go to your blessed music-'all," ses the gal to Ted; "I don't want
you."

She turned round and a'most ran up the road, with Ted follering 'er and
begging of 'er not to be so hasty, and afore they parted she told 'im
that 'er name was.  Emma White, and promised to meet 'im there the next
night at seven.

O' course Mr. Charlie Brice turned up alongside o' Ted the next night,
and at fust Emma said she was going straight off 'ome agin.  She did go
part o' the way, and then, when she found that Ted wouldn't send his mate
off, she came back and, woman-like, said as 'ow she wasn't going to go
'ome just to please Charlie Brice.  She wouldn't speak a word to 'im, and
when they all went to the music-'all together she sat with her face
turned away from 'im and her elbow sticking in 'is chest.  Doing that and
watching the performance at the same time gave 'er a stiff neck, and she
got in such a temper over it she wouldn't hardly speak to Ted, and when
Charlie--meaning well--told 'er to rub it with a bit o' mutton-fat she
nearly went off her 'ead.

"Who asked you to come with us?" she ses, as soon as she could speak.
"'Ow dare you force yourself where you ain't wanted?"

"Ted wants me," ses Charlie.

"We've been together for years," ses Ted.  "You'll like Charlie when you
get used to 'im--everybody does."

"Not me!" ses Emma, with a shiver.  "It gives me the fair creeps to look
at him.  You'll 'ave to choose between us.  If he comes, I sha'n't.
Which is it to be?"

Neither of 'em answered 'er, but the next night they both turned up as
usual, and Emma White stood there looking at 'em and nearly crying with
temper.

"'Ow would you like it if I brought another young lady with me?"  she ses
to Ted.

"It wouldn't make no difference to me," ses Ted.  "Any friend o' yours is
welcome."

Emma stood looking at 'em, and then she patted 'er eyes with a pocket-
'ankercher and began to look more cheerful.

"You ain't the only one that has got a dear friend," she says, looking.
at 'im and wiping 'er lips with the 'ankercher.  "I've got one, and if
Charlie Brice don't promise to stay at 'ome to-morrow night I'll bring
her with me."

"Bring 'er, and welcome," ses Ted.

"I sha'n't stay at 'ome for fifty dear friends," ses Charlie.

"Have it your own way," ses Emma.  "If you come, Sophy Jennings comes,
that's all."

She was as good as 'er word, too, and next night when they turned up they
found Emma and 'er friend waiting for them.  Charlie thought it was the
friend's mother at fust, but he found out arterwards that she was a
widder-woman.  She had 'ad two husbands, and both of 'em 'ad passed away
with a smile on their face.  She seemed to take a fancy to Charlie the
moment she set eyes on 'im, and two or three times, they'd 'ave lost Ted
and Emma if it hadn't been for 'im.

[Illustration: "When they turned up they found Emma and 'er friend
waiting for them."]

They did lose 'em the next night, and Charlie Brice 'ad Mrs. Jennings all
alone to himself for over a couple of hours walking up and down the
Commercial Road talking about the weather; Charles saying 'ow wet and
cold it, was, and thinking p'r'aps they 'ad better go off 'ome afore she
got a chill.

He complained to Ted about it when 'e got 'ome, and Ted promised as it
shouldn't 'appen agin.  He said that 'im and Emma 'ad been so busy
talking about getting married that he 'ad forgotten to keep an eye on
him.

"Married!" ses Charlie, very upset.  "Married!  And wot's to become o'
me?"

"Come and lodge with us," ses Ted.

They shook hands on it, but Ted said they 'ad both better keep it to
themselves a bit and wait until Emma 'ad got more used to Charlie afore
they told her.  Ted let 'er get used to 'im for three days more afore he
broke the news to 'er, and the way she went on was alarming.  She went on
for over ten minutes without taking breath, and she was just going to
start again when Mrs. Jennings stopped her.

"He's all right," she ses.  "You leave 'im alone."

"I'm not touching 'im," ses Emma, very scornful.

"You leave 'im alone," ses Mrs. Jennings, taking hold of Charlie's arm.
"I don't say things about your young man."

Charlie Brice started as if he 'ad been shot, and twice he opened 'is
mouth to speak and show Mrs. Jennings 'er mistake; but, wot with trying
to find 'is voice in the fust place, and then finding words to use it
with in the second, he didn't say anything.  He just walked along
gasping, with 'is mouth open like a fish.

"Don't take no notice of 'er, Charlie," ses Mrs. Jennings.

"I--I don't mind wot she ses," ses pore Charlie; "but you're making a
great----"

"She's quick-tempered, is Emma," ses Mrs. Jennings.  "But, there, so am
I.  Wot you might call a generous temper, but quick."

Charlie went cold all over.

"Treat me well and I treat other people well," ses Mrs. Jennings.  "I
can't say fairer than that, can I?"

Charlie said "Nobody could," and then 'e walked along with her hanging on
to 'is arm, arf wondering whether it would be wrong to shove 'er under a
bus that was passing, and arf wondering whether 'e could do it if it
wasn't.

"As for Emma saying she won't 'ave you for a lodger," ses Mrs. Jennings,
"let 'er wait till she's asked.  She'll wait a long time if I 'ave my
say."

Charlie didn't answer her.  He walked along with 'is mouth shut, his idea
being that the least said the soonest mended.  Even Emma asked 'im at
last whether he 'ad lost 'is tongue, and said it was curious 'ow
different love took different people.

He talked fast enough going 'ome with Ted though, and pretty near lost
'is temper with 'im when Ted asked 'im why he didn't tell Mrs. Jennings
straight that she 'ad made a mistake.

"She knows well enough," he says, grinding 'is teeth; "she was just
trying it on.  That's 'ow it is widders get married agin.  You'll 'ave to
choose between going out with me or Emma, Ted.  I can't face Mrs.
Jennings again.  I didn't think anybody could 'ave parted us like that."

Ted said it was all nonsense, but it was no good, and the next night he
went off alone and came back very cross, saying that Mrs. Jennings 'ad
been with 'em all the time, and when 'e spoke to Emma about it she said
it was just tit for tat, and reminded 'im 'ow she had 'ad to put up with
Charlie.  For four nights running 'e went out for walks, with Emma
holding one of 'is arms and Mrs. Jennings the other.

"It's miserable for you all alone 'ere by yourself; Charlie," he ses.
"Why not come?  She can't marry you against your will.  Besides, I miss
you."

Charlie shook 'ands with 'im, but 'e said 'e wouldn't walk out with Mrs.
Jennings for a fortune.  And all that Ted could say made no difference.
He stayed indoors of an evening reading the paper, or going for little
walks by 'imseif, until at last Ted came 'ome one evening, smiling all
over his face, and told 'im they had both been making fools of themselves
for nothing.

"Mrs. Jennings is going to be married," he ses, clapping Charlie on the
back.

"_Wot?_" ses Charlie.

Ted nodded.  "Her and Emma 'ad words to-night," he ses, laughing, "and it
all come out.  She's been keeping company for some time.  He's away at
present, and they're going to be married as soon as 'e comes back."

"Well," ses Charlie, "why did she----"

"To oblige Emma," ses Ted, "to frighten you into staying at 'ome.  I'd
'ad my suspicions for some time, from one or two things I picked up."

"Ho!" ses Charlie.  "Well, it'll be my turn to laugh to-morrow night.
We'll see whether she can shake me off agin."

Ted looked at 'im a bit worried.  "It's a bit orkard," he ses, speaking
very slow.  "You see, they made it up arterwards, and then they both made
me promise not to tell you, and if you come, they'll know I 'ave."

Charlie did a bit o' thinking.  "Not if I pretend to make love to Mrs.
Jennings?"  he ses, at last, winking at 'im.  "And it'll serve her right
for being deceitful.  We'll see 'ow she likes it.  Wot sort o' chap is
the young man--big?"

"Can't be," ses Ted; "cos Emma called 'im a little shrimp."

"I'll come," ses Charlie; "and it'll be your own fault if they find out
you told me about it."

They fell asleep talking of it, and the next evening Charlie put on a new
neck-tie he 'ad bought, and arter letting Ted have arf an hour's start
went out and met 'em accidental.  The fust Mrs. Jennings knew of 'is
being there was by finding an arm put round 'er waist.

"Good-evening, Sophy," he ses.

"'Ow--'ow dare you?" ses Mrs. Jennings, giving a scream and pushing him
away.

Charlie looked surprised.

"Why, ain't you pleased to see me?"  he ses.  "I've 'ad the raging
toothache for over a week; I've got it now a bit, but I couldn't stay
away from you any longer."

"You behave yourself," ses Mrs. Jennings.

"Ted didn't say anything about your toothache," ses Emma.

"I wouldn't let 'im, for fear of alarming Sophy," ses Charlie.

Mrs. Jennings gave a sort of laugh and a sniff mixed.

"Ain't you pleased to see me agin?"  ses Charlie.

"I don't want to see you," ses Mrs. Jennings.  "Wot d'ye think I want to
see you for?"

"Change your mind pretty quick, don't you?" ses Charlie.  "It's blow 'ot
and blow cold with you seemingly.  Why, I've been counting the minutes
till I should see you agin."

Mrs. Jennings told 'im not to make a fool of 'imself, and Charlie saw 'er
look at Emma in a puzzled sort of way, as if she didn't know wot to make
of it.  She kept drawing away from 'im and he kept drawing close to 'er;
other people on the pavement dodging and trying to get out of their way,
and asking them which side they was going and to stick to it.

"Why don't you behave yourself?" ses Emma, at last.

"We're all right," ses Charlie; "you look arter your own young man.  We
can look arter ourselves."

"Speak for yourself," ses Mrs. Jennings, very sharp.

Charlie laughed, and the more Mrs. Jennings showed 'er dislike for 'is
nonsense the more he gave way to it.  Even Ted thought it was going too
far, and tried to interfere when he put his arm round Mrs. Jennings's
waist and made 'er dance to a piano-organ; but there was no stopping 'im,
and at last Mrs. Jennings said she had 'ad enough of it, and told Emma
she was going off 'ome.

[Illustration: "He put his arm round Mrs. Jennings's waist and made 'er
dance to a piano-organ."]

"Don't take no notice of 'im," ses Emma.

"I must," ses Mrs. Jennings, who was arf crying with rage.

"Well, if you go 'ome, I shall go," ses Emma.  "I don't want 'is company.
I believe he's doing it on purpose.

"Behave yourself, Charlie," ses Ted.

"All right, old man," ses Charlie.  "You look arter your young woman and
I'll look arter mine."

"Your wot?" ses Mrs. Jennings, very loud.

"My young woman," ses Charlie.

"Look 'ere," ses Emma.  "You may as well know first as last--Sophy 'as
got a young man."

"O' course she 'as," ses Charlie.  "Twenty-seven on the second of next
January, he is; same as me."

"She's going to be married," ses Emma, very solemn.

"Yes, to me," ses Charlie, pretending to be surprised.  "Didn't you know
that?"

He looked so pleased with 'imself at his cleverness that Emma arf put up
her 'and, and then she thought better of it and turned away.

"He's just doing it to get rid of you," she ses to Mrs. Jennings, "and if
you give way you're a bigger silly than I took you for.  Let 'im go on
and 'ave his own way, and tell your intended about 'im when you see 'im.
Arter all, you started it."

"I was only 'aving a bit o' fun," ses Mrs. Jennings.

"Well, so is he," ses Emma.

"Not me!" ses Charlie, turning his eyes up.  "I'm in dead earnest; and so
is she.  It's only shyness on 'er part; it'll soon wear off."

He took 'old of Mrs. Jennings's arm agin and began to tell 'er 'ow lonely
'is life was afore she came acrost his path like an angel that had lost
its way.  And he went on like that till she told Emma that she'd either
'ave to go off 'ome or scream.  Ted interfered agin then, and, arter
listening to wot he 'ad got to say, Charlie said as 'ow he'd try and keep
his love under control a bit more.

"She won't stand much more of it," he ses to Ted, arter they 'ad got 'ome
that night.  "I shouldn't be surprised if she don't turn up to-morrow."

Ted shook his 'ead.  "She'll turn up to oblige Emma," he ses; "but
there's no need for you to overdo it, Charlie.  If her young man 'appened
to get to 'ear of it it might cause trouble."

"I ain't afraid of 'im," ses Charlie, "not if your description of 'im is
right."

"Emma knows 'im," ses Ted, "and I know she don't think much of 'im.  She
says he ain't as big as I am."

Charlie smiled to himself and laid awake for a little while thinking of
pet names to surprise Mrs. Jennings with.  He called 'er a fresh one
every night for a week, and every night he took 'er a little bunch o'
flowers with 'is love.  When she flung 'em on the pavement he pretended
to think she 'ad dropped 'em; but, do wot he would, 'e couldn't frighten
'er into staying away, and 'is share of music-'alls and bus rides and
things like that was more than 'e cared to think of.  All the time Ted
was as happy as a sand-boy, and one evening when Emma asked 'im to go
'ome to supper 'e was so pleased 'e could 'ardly speak.

"Father thought he'd like to see you," ses Emma.  "I shall be proud to
shake 'im by the 'and," ses Ted, going red with joy.

"And you're to come, too, Sophy," ses Emma, turning to Mrs. Jennings.

Charlie coughed, feeling a bit orkard-like, and Emma stood there as if
waiting for 'im to go.

"Well, so long," ses Charlie at last.  "Take care o' my little prize
packet."

"You can come, too, if you like," ses Emma.  "Father said I was to bring
you.  Don't 'ave none of your nonsense there, that's all."

Charlie thanked 'er, and they was all walking along, him and Mrs.
Jennings behind, when Emma looked over 'er shoulder.

"Sophy's young man is coming," she ses.

"Ho!" ses Charlie.  He walked along doing a bit o' thinking, and by and
by 'e gives a little laugh, and he ses, "I--I don't think p'r'aps I'll
come arter all."

"Afraid?" ses Emma, with a nasty laugh.

"No," ses Charlie.

"Well, it looks like it," ses Emma.

"He's brave enough where wimmen are concerned," ses Mrs. Jennings.

"I was thinking of you," ses Charlie.

"You needn't trouble about me," ses Mrs. Jennings.  "I can look after
myself, thank you."

Charlie looked round, but there was no help for it.  He got as far away
from Mrs. Jennings as possible, and when they got to Emma's house he went
in last.

Emma's father and mother was there and two or three of 'er brothers and
sisters, but the fust thing that Charlie noticed was a great lump of a
man standing by the mantelpiece staring at 'im.

"Come in, and make yourselves at 'ome," ses Mr. White.  "I'm glad to see
you both.  Emma 'as told me all about you."

Charlie's 'art went down into 'is boots, but every-body was so busy
drawing their chairs up to the table that they didn't notice 'ow pale he
'ad gone.  He sat between Mr. White and Mrs. Jennings, and by and by,
when everybody was talking, he turned to 'im in a whisper, and asked 'im
who the big chap was.

"Mrs. Jennings's brother," ses Mr. White; "brewer's drayman he is."

Charlie said, "Oh!" and went on eating, a bit relieved in 'is mind.

"Your friend and my gal 'll make a nice couple," ses Mr. White, looking
at Ted and Emma, sitting 'and in 'and.

"She couldn't 'ave a better husband," ses Charlie, whispering again; "but
where is Mrs. Jennings's young man?  I 'eard he was to be here."

Mr. White put down 'is knife and fork.  "Eh?" he ses, staring at 'im.

"Mrs. Jennings's intended?"  ses Charlie.

"Who are you getting at?" ses Mr. White, winking at 'im.

"But she 'as got one, ain't she?"  ses Charlie.  "That'll do," ses Mr.
White, with another wink.  "Try it on somebody else."

"Wot are you two talking about?"  ses Emma, who 'ad been watching 'em.

"He's trying to pull my leg," ses 'er father, smiling all over his face.
"Been asking me where Mrs. Jennings's young man is.  P'r'aps you oughtn't
to 'ave told us yet, Emma."

"It's all right," ses Emma.  "He's got a very jealous disposition, poor
fellow; and me and Sophy have been telling 'im about a young man just to
tease 'im.  We've been describing him to 'imself all along, and he
thought it was somebody else."

She caught Charlie's eye, and all in a flash he saw 'ow he 'ad been done.
Some of 'em began to laugh, and Mrs. Jennings put her 'and on his and
gave it a squeeze.  He sat there struck all of a heap, wondering wot he
was going to do, and just at that moment there was a knock at the street
door.

"I'll open it," he ses.

He jumped up before anybody could stop 'im and went to the door.  Two
seconds arter Ted Denver followed 'im, and that is last he ever saw of
Charlie Brice, he was running down the road without 'is hat as hard as he
could run.

[Illustration: "He was running down the road without 'is hat as hard as
he could run."]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Odd Man Out, by W.W. Jacobs

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ODD MAN OUT ***

***** This file should be named 10786.txt or 10786.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/7/8/10786/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


