The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Moral Picture Book, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Moral Picture Book

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: August 31, 2004 [EBook #13344]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MORAL PICTURE BOOK ***




Produced by David Garcia and PG Distributed Proofreaders. Produced
from page scans provided by the Internet Archive and University of
Florida.











THE MORAL PICTURE BOOK




[Illustration: THE MORAL PICTURE BOOK: PRAYER]




JOHN COOPER.

       *       *       *       *       *

John Cooper was a little boy, whose father and mother lived in a cottage
on one side of a village green. He was his parents' only child, so that
he had no brothers nor sisters to play with. But he had a dog of which
he was very fond, and he used sometimes to play with other children on
the green. Tom Jones was one of the boys that played with John Cooper.
One day he asked John Cooper to go for a long walk with him, instead of
going to school. John at first would not consent, but at last he gave
way and went with Tom, taking Carlo with him.

There was a pretty stream of water that ran along one side of the green,
and then passed through a wood in a winding course. In some places it
was rather broad and deep, and in other places it was shallow, and ran
murmuring over the stones at the bottom. Tom said that it would be very
pleasant to go along the stream, sometimes on one side, and sometimes on
the other, far into the wood, and to look for birds' nests. The sun was
shining very brightly, the trees were in full leaf, the grass was thick
and green, sweet flowers were blooming on all sides, butter-flies and
dragon-flies sported in the sunshine, and birds were singing on every
bush and tree. All things seemed to be joyful, and the two boys started
off briskly, with Carlo after them.

But of this party, the only one that was truly happy, was Carlo. He had
nothing to do but to obey his master, and this he had done when John had
called him away from his home. John tried to raise his own spirits, and
ran, and jumped about, and romped with Carlo. But he could not forget
that he had done wrong, that he ought to have been at school, and that
he should grieve his kind parents when they knew what he was now doing.
The thought of this would come into his mind, and kept him from being
happy. As for Tom Jones, he seemed merry enough, though he not only knew
that he was doing wrong himself, but that he had led John into mischief.
He tried to forget this, and laughed and shouted with all his might; but
it was in vain, and he had bitter feelings at the bottom of his heart
all the time.

[Illustration: AFFECTION]

They went on rambling till they had got more than a mile into the wood.
The stream here was wide and deep. On one side of it there grew an old
willow, and in one of the branches of this, they saw a wren's nest. As
Tom was the stronger boy of the two, it was agreed that he should help
John up to the branch, so that he might reach the nest. John got upon
the branch, and he had put out his hand to take hold of the nest, when
the branch broke off, and down he fell into the water. Tom laughed at
this, for he knew that the stream was not deep enough to drown him: but
Carlo rushed in and dragged his master by the clothes towards the bank.
John scrambled out, but he was covered with mud. Tom helped him to take
off his clothes, and clean off the mud and dry them; but with all they
could do, John was still in a sad mess, and as it was now late in the
day, he turned to go home with a heavy heart.

When he reached the cottage, he found his father and mother in great
alarm, as they could not think what had become of him. When they found
out what had taken place, their alarm was changed into grief, on account
of the son whom they loved so much, having done wrong. John himself
cried a great deal, and said that he was more vexed because he had
caused them grief, than he should have been, if they had scolded and
whipped him. His mother told him that she left it to his own heart to
scold him, and that he should go to his bed-room and pray to God on his
knees to forgive him, as she had taught him to pray.

John did as she bade him, and he prayed to God with all his heart.
He then went to sleep with a quiet mind; and when he awoke the next
morning, he prayed again that God would give him strength to do his
duty, and to stand firm when he should be tempted again as he had been
by Tom Jones. He then read a chapter in the Bible to his mother, and
went to school. His master kept him in, and gave him only a piece of
bread and a cup of water for dinner. But he did not suffer nearly so
much from this as he had done from having grieved his dear parents; for
he had before this been brought to repent, and he felt that God, and
his father and mother, had forgiven him.

John Cooper never again grieved his father and mother by doing wrong,
and never forgot the lesson he had learned, when Tom Jones led him
astray, as long as he lived.

[Illustration: SUNDAY MORNING]

When John Cooper became a man, there were bad times, and he could not
get a living at the trade to which he had been brought up: so he went
for a horse-soldier. And before he went, his father and mother gave him
their blessing, and he prayed with all his heart that God would bless
the old people, and preserve them; and said he would let them have as
much of his pay as ever he could.

It was a sad day for him and his parents when he went away. They had
never been parted for so long a time before, and he was now going to
India, from whence he could not return for some years. But they could
not help it; so they all said that it was God's will that they should
part, and it was their duty to bear it as well as they could.

After John was gone, the old people never missed a day but they prayed
to God to keep their son, both in his soul and body, from all evil. They
were very poor, and were now too old to work much; but with what they
got of John's pay, they had enough just to live upon, and above all they
had thankful hearts, which made them happy. Yet they often wished for
John's return; sometimes too they were fearful lest he should be killed
or wounded in the wars; but when they felt thus, they always tried to
put their trust in God.

When John had been away ten years, he came back one day, safe and sound,
as his father and mother were standing at the door of the cottage. You
may judge how they all felt, and how many questions his fond mother
asked him, as to where he had been, and how he had got on.

The next day was Sunday, and both John and his parents were glad of it,
for they wished to go to church to offer up their thanks to God, who had
kept John safe through many dangers, had saved the lives of the old
people, and had now brought them to each other again.

It was a fine bright morning in Spring, just such a one as it had been
nearly twenty years before, when Tom Jones had tempted John Cooper to
keep away from school, and to go into the wood to take birds' nests.
John did not forget that day; and when it came into his mind, he could
not help thinking of the changes that had taken place since.

He went to church, and you may be sure that he and the old man and woman
gave thanks to God with all their hearts, for the mercy he had shewn to
them.

[Illustration: CHARITY]




CHARITY.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mary Jones was a poor woman whose husband had gone to sea on a long
voyage. She lived in a house by the road side, and got her living by
washing. She had two little boys, who were her great comfort, and whom
she used to call Ned and Tom.

For some time after her husband had left, she got on very well, and was
able to send the boys to school: but she caught a fever and was forced
to keep her bed. Her neighbour, Sarah Smith, was very kind to her, and
used to come to the house every morning and evening to do what she could
to help her. But she was a poor woman, and could not afford to give Mary
Jones anything that cost money; so poor Mary was forced to part with a
great many things that she might get food.

Ned and Tom at this time took turns to go to school. Tom used to go to
school one day, while Ned waited on his mother; and the next day Ned
went to school and Tom staid at home. One morning when Ned was going to
school, the thought of his poor mother pressed hard on his heart; and
after he had gone a little way, he burst out crying.

He had not gone far along the narrow lane towards the school, when two
young ladies met him and asked him why he was crying. He told them that
he was thinking of his poor sick mother. The ladies then asked him his
name and where he lived, and said they would go and call upon his
mother. He thanked them and dried up his tears, and went on to school
with a much lighter heart.

Soon after he reached home in the evening, the two kind ladies came to
his mother's house with a foot-boy, who brought a basket filled with
bread and meat, and some things fit for the poor sick woman.

They told Mary Jones how they had met Ned in the lane, and what he had
told them; and she thanked them for what they had brought, and said that
she hoped God would bless them for their goodness to her. They then
asked about Ned and Tom, and said they would get their father to do what
he could for them.

The young ladies then went home, told their father and mother what they
had seen and heard, and thanked God that they had been able to make a
poor woman and her two sons happy.




HOSPITALITY.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a poor woman named Rachel Jenkins, who lived in a very little
cottage at some distance from any other house. She was a widow, and very
poor, but she was very clean and careful; so that her cottage had always
a look of neatness and comfort. She used to spend most of her time in
spinning.

She had one son, whose name was Harry. He was twelve years old, and used
to carry a basket filled with tapes and thread, pins and needles, and
other things of that sort, which he sold to people who lived near. He
used to go out in the morning and return in the evening; and you may be
sure his mother was always glad when the time came for him to come home.

One evening, as he was on his way home, about half a mile from his
mother's house, he saw an old man sitting by the way-side, who was very
tired, and seemed as if he was not able to walk any further. His hair
was quite white, and his face and hands were thin and wrinkled.

Harry said to him in a kind voice, "You seem tired, father; have you got
much further to walk." The old man told him that he had to go to the
next town, which was twelve miles further; but that he was so tired, he
was sure that he should not be able to get there that night. On this,
Harry said, "I wish you would go home with me; for I am sure my mother
would be very glad that you should sleep in our house." The old man
thanked him and said he would go with him. So he rested his hand upon
Harry's shoulder, and walked slowly towards the house. Harry's mother
met them at the door; and when Harry had told her how he had met with
the old man, she said she was glad to see him, and asked him to walk in
to take some tea.

After tea, the old man told Sarah Jenkins that he was going to see his
son, who was laid up in a hospital in the town to which he was going.
His son was a soldier, and had been in the West Indies for some years;
but he caught the yellow fever, and was sent home sick.

The next morning the old man went on his way, and blessed Sarah Jenkins
and Harry, because they had done good to him who could make no other
return than to thank them and pray for them.

[Illustration: HOSPITALITY]




SUNDAY EVENING.

       *       *       *       *       *

When I was a girl, Sunday evening used to be the part of the week that I
loved best; and I liked it better in Winter than in Summer. We used to
sit round a blazing fire; my mother used then to teach my little brother
Tom to say his prayers, and my father used to teach me to read in
Pilgrim's Progress, or some such book; while my brother John sat near
reading some book or other that was fit for a Sunday, with his dog
Hector lying at his feet.

My dear old grand-father was then alive, and he would sit at the table
with the large old family Bible before him for the whole evening.

As I look back upon the pleasant picture in my mind, my eye fills with
tears. I cannot help thinking of what has become of the faces that were
then so full of smiles and gladness. My grand-father went to the grave
first, but he died in a good old age; and though we mourned to lose him
whom we had all loved so much, we could not help feeling that it was a
happy change for him, as he could hardly see or hear. Next to him, my
poor little brother Tom fell ill of the typhus fever, and God took him
to heaven in the budding of his child-hood. Only a year or two ago, my
father gave me his dying blessing, and was then a very old man. My
mother now survives, though very old; and my two sisters, Mary and
Elizabeth, who were then lively girls, are living, and are the mothers
of families. My brother John, a middle-aged man, is the Captain of a
ship, being now far away on a voyage; and he has left behind him a wife
and two boys, the youngest of whom is as old as he was at the time I
have spoken of. I am almost an old woman; though on these happy evenings
that I was speaking of, I was the youngest but one.

You, my little friends, will, perhaps, some day have to look back upon
such changes as I have seen. The thought that they will come upon you
need not make you sad, but it should make you good, and cause you to
resolve to do your duty and to serve God. If you do so, when you get as
old as I am, you will find that if age brings its cares and sorrows, it
also brings surer and even brighter hopes of a life beyond the grave.

[Illustration: SUNDAY EVENING]




CONTENTMENT.

       *       *       *       *       *

John Davis and his wife were very poor people, but as they worked very
hard, they could just get a living for themselves. John worked for a
farmer in the parish, and his wife took in needle-work.

They did pretty well, when John had work; but for nearly two years
John's master could not employ him always, and he was brought almost to
distress. But his wife always used to keep up his spirits by saying, "Be
content, and thank God if you can but live; brighter hours will come."

Sometimes John was quite spirit-broken, and said he should leave home
and try to get work somewhere else. He was forced to sell some of his
goods to buy food, and did not know which way to turn. But his wife
never failed to wear a cheerful face, and used to be always saying to
him, "Do your best, and be content to take what God appoints."

John loved his wife very much; but he was sometimes half vexed because
she was never sad like he was. He would tell her that it was a very good
thing to be cheerful and happy when they could get a good living. She
then used to say to him, that there was no virtue in being content when
all was going on well; and that the proper time to try to be cheerful
was, when things were going amiss.

At last, better times came. John got into work on the estate of a rich
man who lived near; and as he was a very honest man and knew his work,
his master soon put him in a place of trust, raised his wages, and gave
him a good house to live in.

John had by this time got five children, and he could no longer deny
that he had reason enough to be a happy man. You may see him and his
wife and children in the picture, enjoying a fine Summer's evening in
front of their house.

I knew John when I was young, and he was always ready to say how much
was due to his good wife. He told me that he owed all his good fortune
to her cheerful spirits and good advice to him; and added, that now he
was well off he found the truth of what she had told him, that the
proper time to try to be cheerful was, when things were going amiss. I
have never forgot that lesson, and I hope I never shall; and I beg my
young friends to keep in mind that 'Contentment is a constant feast.'

[Illustration: CONTENTMENT]




INDUSTRY.

       *       *       *       *       *

"There is work enough in the world for every one to do something. There
is no proper place for idle people." This is what old Michael the basket
maker used to say to his children; and as they grew up, they found
reason enough to thank him for the lesson.

Michael had been a sailor in his youth, but when he married, he settled
in a country place, and took up the trade of a basket maker. At first,
he could hardly get money enough to buy rods: but by working very hard,
he soon got money and credit too. No one in the village was now up
before Michael, and most people went to bed before he left off work.

Small as was the sum of money that he could earn in a week, he would
always put by something, if it was but a penny. Every month he put these
savings into the savings' bank; and in the course of the first six
years, he found he had got twenty-five pounds.

By this time he had got two children, and the eldest was old enough to
learn to read. She used to sit by him with her book as he worked, and he
taught her when she wanted help. His wife was in the mean time doing
something in the house, or working for some of the farmers who lived
near.

Michael now bought a cow and two pigs, and made some profit by them. In
six years more he bought the cottage he lived in; and twelve years after
this, that is twenty-four years after he was married, he rented a little
farm. By this time he had seven children; and as he had made his cottage
larger, they all lived at home and helped him. His eldest boys worked at
the farm, and the girls milked the cows and made the butter, under the
care of their mother, and kept the poultry.

As for Michael himself, though he was well off, he kept on his old
trade, and went on in his old habits. The last time I saw him before I
left the place in which he lived, he was teaching his youngest child to
read while he was at work, just as he had taught his eldest.

I have often thought of Michael's words, "There is no place in the world
for idle people."

[Illustration: INDUSTRY]








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Moral Picture Book, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MORAL PICTURE BOOK ***

***** This file should be named 13344.txt or 13344.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/3/3/4/13344/

Produced by David Garcia and PG Distributed Proofreaders. Produced
from page scans provided by the Internet Archive and University of
Florida.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
