The Project Gutenberg EBook of Charles Duran, by The Author of The Waldos

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Charles Duran
       Or, The Career of a Bad Boy

Author: The Author of The Waldos

Release Date: March 30, 2005 [EBook #15507]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHARLES DURAN ***




Produced by Internet Archive; University of Florida, PM Childrens
Library, Melissa Er-Raqabi and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net.





CHARLES DURAN:
OR,
THE CAREER OF A BAD BOY.


BY THE AUTHOR OF
"THE WALDOS."

[Illustration: CHARLES ON HIS DEATH BED.--SEE PAGE 52.]

New-York:
PUBLISHED BY CARLTON & PORTER,
SUNDAY-SCHOOL UNION, 200 MULBERRY-STREET.




Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1850, by
LANE & SCOTT,
in the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the Southern
District of New-York.




CONTENTS.


CHAPTER I

THE HOMESTEAD.

The house--Court-yards--Garden--The well--"Oaken bucket"--The
fields--Flocks--River--Fish--Forest--Church

CHAPTER II.

THE BIRTH OF CHARLES.

Effects on the parents--The Joneses--Parental expectations--An instance
of disappointment--Ann's prophecy

CHAPTER III.

HIS EARLY TRAINING.

Opinions--The Durans indulgent--The sulks--They produce blindness--"I
will"--"I won't"--Faults of parents

CHAPTER IV.

CHARLES DURAN AT SCHOOL.

Good children at home are good in school--Conduct--Inattention to
studies--Unkind to his school-mates--Samuel Howard--Helen Fay--John and
Louisa--Severe whipping--Mr. Spicer--Charles expelled from school


CHAPTER V.

CHARLES'S HABITS.

Good habits--Proverbs of the Rabbins--Charles not
improved--Idleness--Fishing and hunting--No idle boy can be
good--Shooting--Roughness of manners--One vice is followed by
another--Lying--Sabbath-breaking--Intemperance--A standard of wickedness


CHAPTER VI.

THE FATAL NIGHT.

Village balls--Description--Culpability of parents--Demand for
money--Fit--House stoned--Windows broken in--Mr. Duran with the
bag--Charles's wrath appeased--The ball--Charles intoxicated--Falls to
the floor--Brought home speechless--Laid upon his death-bed



CHAPTER VII

SICKNESS AND DEATH.

Sufferings from the debauch--Crisis--Favorable change--Hopes of recovery
cut off--Consumption--Contrivance to change his position--State of
mind--The minister visits him--No evidence of penitence--The dying scene


CHAPTER VIII.

THE CONCLUSION.

The way of transgressors hard--Disobedience to parents a fearful
sin--Parental restraint--Pleasures of parental approbation--Disobedience
in scholars--Reflections--Sporting habits in children not to be
encouraged--Importance of early religious training--History of young
Duran a warning to Sabbath-breakers, &c.--Beware of the first sin--The
End




CHARLES DURAN.




CHAPTER I.

THE DURAN HOMESTEAD.


Before giving the history of Charles Duran's birth, life, and early
death, I will partially describe his father's residence. It was situated
in the town of ----, in the State of Connecticut, and about six miles
from the west bank of the beautiful Connecticut river. The house stood
on a level road, running north and south, and was about one mile from
the centre of the town.

Mr. Duran's house was large and commodious. It was built of wood, two
stories high, and painted a deep yellow. In the front was a fine
court-yard. In this yard were lilacs of a large growth, roses of various
kinds, and flowering almonds. These shrubs blossomed early in the
spring, and sent forth their fragrance to perfume the air.

On the south was a rich and well-cultivated garden, producing an
abundance of vegetables, gooseberries, currants, and raspberries. The
borders of the main alley were decked with pionies, pinks, and
sweet-williams.

Between the garden and the house was the well. A long sweep, resting on
the top of a high post, with a pole fastened to the upper end, was the
rude contrivance for drawing water. To the lower end of the pole was
attached a bucket. How many of New-England's sons remember with delight
the "old oaken bucket that hung in the well!"

On the north side of the house was a small orchard. In the rear were the
barn, sheds, crib, and other out-buildings.

The grounds in the immediate neighborhood were level or slightly
undulated. On the north and east were beautiful meadows. On the south
and west were excellent tillage and pasture lands. The season that I
spent there was one of nature's bountifulness. The tall herd's-grass,
the rustling corn, and the whitened grain waved in the summer's breeze,
and bespoke the plenty that followed the toil and industry of the
husbandman. The herds were feeding in the fields. The innocent lambs,
free from care, were leaping and frisking about--some in the sun and
some in the shade--while their more sober dames were either grazing, or
quietly masticating the food they had previously collected.

Half encircling these premises was a fine stream of water, varying from
three to seven yards in width. It was supplied with dace, trout, roach,
and perch. Its plaintive, monotonous murmur sometimes impressed the mind
with sadness. This was soon dispelled, however, by the twittering, the
glee, and the sweet notes of the birds, that hopped from spray to spray,
or quietly perched themselves on the overhanging branches.

Some little distance to the northwest of Mr. Duran's house was a forest
of thrifty growth, covered with a varied and beautiful foliage. Its
shady bowers and pleasant walks made it a delightful place of
resort,--especially toward the time of sunsetting. Nature seemed to lend
to it then peculiar charms.

In the centre of the town stood the old church, antiquated in its
appearance, but venerable and holy in its associations. In that
old-fashioned church have been settled three successive ministers of the
gospel. In those high-backed, square pews were other generations wont to
sit. Those pastors and their flocks now sleep in the grave. Their sons
occupy their places in the sanctuary, and another herald of the cross
proclaims to them the word of life. It was in this pleasant place, which
I have briefly described, that Charles Duran was born.




CHAPTER II.

THE BIRTH OF CHARLES.


The birth of Charles was an occasion of great joy in Mr. Duran's family.
Blessings long withheld are frequently more highly prized when at length
received. Mr. Duran had no children, and was now past the meridian of
life. To him this child seemed like one born out of due time.

It was amusing to see the effect produced on the parents by this, till
recently, unexpected event. "Well, Molly," said Mr. Jones,--a neighbor
of Mr. Duran, whose wife had just been to see the strange visitant, and
who had reared a large family of children,--"how do Mr. and Mrs. Duran
act with the boy?" "Act? why just like two grown-up children. And they
think it is the most wonderful child that ever was born. But they don't
know what it may live to be!"

These last words were spoken in a tone of voice which told of hidden
springs of sorrow. One of Mrs. Jones' own dear children, a promising,
lovely boy, had early become intemperate, and was now sleeping in a
drunkard's grave!

Having passed through the ordinary nursery incidents of the first months
of infancy, Charley--for so he was familiarly called--became a fine fat
child. "Sweet boy," said his mother, as she rather clumsily patted his
cheeks, and felt of his tender limbs, "you will be a comfort to your
parents in their old age."

"I was just thinking of that," added the father. "What a blessing he
will be to us! He will manage the farm--administer to our comfort, and
inherit our estate."

Many a bright sunny morning has been followed by a dark cloudy evening.
Our supposed blessings often prove to us a source of disappointment and
sorrow. I have seen the mother clasp her lovely infant to her breast,
and fondly and dotingly caress it, and press its little hands and feet,
soft as velvet, with her lips. And I have seen that child, the rainbow
of promise, and the cause of so much joy, bring down that mother's head,
ere it was gray, with sorrow to the grave.

Thoughts like these, however, never crossed the minds of Mr. and Mrs.
Duran. They dreamed not that sickness and death might blast their
hopes, and leave them more lonely than they were before. So staid and
uniform had been their own life, that they never once supposed that
Charles, if he should grow up, could pursue any other course.

Every day little Charles became more and more the object of cherished
hopes and affections. The hearts of the parents were bound up in him. He
became their idol. His wants, real and imaginary, were all met. His
danger was of being spoiled by too much indulgence.

"I believe they will kill him with kindness," was the remark of Ann, a
colored woman, who had long lived in the family. "It is just the way Mr.
Parsons used to do with his Jim, who never amounted to anything."




CHAPTER III.

HIS EARLY TRAINING.


"Train up a child in the way he should go; and when he is old he will
not depart from it." Prov. xxii, 6. The proper training of children is
of the utmost importance. Upon it to a great extent depend their
usefulness and happiness in the world. And as the happiness of parents
is so intimately connected with the course of conduct pursued by their
children, it should be with them a constant study how they may promote
the well-being of their offspring.

On this subject much has been said and written. Some recommend
indulgence as the surest way to give a child a good disposition, and to
lead to the formation of correct habits. Others urge the necessity of
restraint and uncompromising obedience, on the part of children, to the
commands of their parents. There may be extremes in both. Children
should be taught to fear and love their parents, and to respect their
wishes. The government of children should be strictly parental. The
parent's will should be the law of the child. Proper indulgence should
be allowed; entire obedience enforced. Parents and children should both
remember the words of the apostle: "Children, obey your parents in all
things: for this is well pleasing unto the Lord. Fathers, provoke not
your children to anger, lest they be discouraged." Col. iii, 20, 21.

Mr. and Mrs. Duran were very indulgent to their only child. His wants
were met with a liberal hand, and his wishes, as far as possible,
gratified. If his desires were not immediately granted, he soon learned
that a little crying would accomplish his object.

Improper indulgence begets unlawful desires. Unlawful desires can never
be fully satisfied. So it was with Charles Duran: everything he saw, he
wanted. When he was not indulged, as he could not be always, he soon
showed his bad spirit. Sometimes he pouted out his lips, and had a long
fit of the sulks.

Perhaps my readers never saw a child affected with the sulks. I will
briefly describe them. First, the eyes begin to roll rapidly in their
sockets, and the sight turns upward. The chin falls down a little, and
the corners of the mouth are slightly drawn back. The lower lip then
rolls down nearly to the chin. Soon a whining commences, which grows
louder and louder, and becomes disagreeable to every person present. At
the same time the eyes turn red, the face gets out of shape, and the
child becomes _blind!_ I saw a little boy once have the sulks so badly
that when his mother sent him into his room to get his apron, before
sitting down to dinner, he could not find it, though it was in plain
sight! Before he was two years old, Charles showed a very bad
disposition. This, instead of being corrected, was fostered by the
training which he received. To the domestics in the family he was
insolent and unkind; and even to his parents, _"I will"_ and _"I won't"_
were said with fearful frequency. Still the doting parents would merely
say to him, "You should not do so, Charles! You should say, 'I don't
want to,' or, 'I do want to,'" as the case might be. Thus they
indirectly taught him disobedience, which he was learning fast enough
without such assistance. In this way did these parents, with cruel
kindness, help on the ruin of their child!

Charles Duran, with all his faults, was a bright, active boy. What he
needed was training,--_parental training_. His parents committed two
very common errors: they promised him correction for his disobedience,
without inflicting the punishment; and they often repeated his sayings,
and spoke of his doings, to others, in his presence. Parents should
always keep good faith with their children; and, while they encourage
them, when they are alone, by suitable and well-timed praise, they
should rarely repeat what they have said, or speak of what they have
done, to others, in their presence. This is injurious to the child,
betrays vanity in the parents, and is not very edifying to others. The
singing of a young raven may be music to its parents, but to us it is
like the cawing of a crow.




CHAPTER IV.

CHARLES DURAN AT SCHOOL.


Charles was now old enough to go to school. He was accordingly sent to
the district school, not far from his father's house. Teachers say that
they can tell whether children are good and obedient at home by their
conduct in school. Those children who mind their parents will generally
obey their teachers; and those scholars that are obedient generally
learn well.

How was it with Charles Duran at school? Did he obey his teacher? At
first, as all things in the school were new and strange to him, he was
somewhat restrained. He soon, however, became acquainted with his
teacher and the scholars, and as soon learned to break the rules of the
school. He became disrespectful to his teacher, and caused him much
trouble.

Charles was also very inattentive to his books. The teacher did the best
he could to make him learn; but his lessons were never more than half
learned, and the greater part of the time they were not studied at all:
and, though naturally he was a bright, smart boy, he seemed determined
to grow up a blockhead.

The next thing I notice in the school history of this boy is the
unkindness which he showed his school-fellows. If he played with them,
he was quite sure to get offended before the play was through. He was
surly, self-willed, and disposed always to have his own way in
everything.

One day Samuel Howard, a boy smaller than himself, was flying his kite.
There was a fine breeze, and the kite floated beautifully in the air.
Charles seized the twine, and began to pull in the kite. Samuel
remonstrated with him; but the more he remonstrated the more ugly was
Charles. He pulled in the kite, tore it all to pieces, and broke and
snarled the twine. Samuel cried at the loss of his pretty kite, and
Charles Duran was mean enough to mimic the boy whom he had thus injured.

At another time, a little girl, whose name was Helen Fay, was returning
from school: Charles threw a stone, and hit her on the cheek-bone. It
cut a great gash in her face, and made the blood run freely. Had the
stone struck a little higher, it would probably have put out her eye; as
it was, her face was badly scarred.

A poor widow lady lived some distance beyond Mr. Duran's house. She had
two dear little children, John and Louisa, whom she sent to school. This
poor mother was industrious and very neat, and her children were always
dressed in neat, clean clothes. Charles Duran, who was out of his
element when he was not in mischief, seemed to take delight in
tormenting these little children. On their way from school one day, when
they had on their nice clothes, he covered them from head to foot with
dirt and mud. In that sad plight John and Louisa went home crying. Their
mother felt as badly as they did, when she saw the ugliness of her
neighbor's spoiled child.

So constantly was Charles injuring the smaller boys and girls in the
school that none of them loved him. If he got hurt, none of them pitied
him. The whole school seemed glad, one day, when he had shoved a little
girl into a mud-puddle, and upset an inkstand on a boy's writing-book,
and spoiled it, to see the master give him a severe whipping,--such as
he deserved.

It is not agreeable to dwell longer upon the conduct of this boy in
school. He became so quarrelsome and disagreeable that no one was
willing to sit next to him. He was always spoken of as the worst boy in
school.

Mr. Spicer was now his teacher, and he had borne with him till he could
bear with him no longer. He had pretty much made up his mind that he
would turn him out of his school. Before doing that, however, he was
desirous of knowing the minds of his scholars. He called the school to
order, and then told Charles what he had thought of doing; reminded him
of his disobedience, of his unkindness to his school-mates, and of his
general neglect of his studies. He told him if he did not do differently
he would grow up without friends, and, in all probability, in
consequence of his sins, come down to an early grave.

Mr. Spicer then addressed the scholars, and said, "All of you who think
Charles Duran ought to be expelled from the school for continued bad
conduct, raise your right hands." In a moment every right hand was
raised up!

Then Mr. Spicer said, in a solemn and affecting manner, _"Charles Duran,
with the voice of all your school-mates, you are expelled from this
school, for bad conduct."_




CHAPTER V.

CHARLES'S HABITS.


Good habits are of the greatest importance. If they are cultivated by
the young, they become fixed and permanent. Evil habits, unless they are
corrected, will increase in number and strength. The young should beware
of the first evil habit. A boy does not become a bad boy all at once: he
gives way to one bad habit, and then to another. One small sin prepares
the way for another and a greater one. Dr. Clarke says, "Sin is a small
matter in its commencement; but by indulgence it grows great, and
multiplies itself beyond all calculation." The old rabbins used to say
it was like a spider's web at first, and that it increased till it was
like a cart-rope. This is seen in the case of Charles Duran. His
expulsion from school did not improve him: he grew up in the indulgence
of his bad temper, and, instead of being a lovely, industrious boy, fond
of his studies, and attentive to his various duties, he was idle, lazy,
and vicious. When he ought to have been in school, he was fishing, and
idling away his time along the margins of the brooks and rivers. He soon
learned to use a gun, and much of his time was spent in the woods,
hunting birds, squirrels, and rabbits. Idle habits are very dangerous. A
boy or man that is habitually idle cannot be good,--mark that. The devil
will always find mischief for such persons, and he will be very sure
to get them into it.

[Illustration: CHARLES HUNTING.]

Charles had, what many boys desire, a gun, and was very fond of
shooting. Besides shooting squirrels and birds, he would shoot at marks
on his father's out-buildings and fences. There was not a door, not a
board, not a post, and scarcely a rail, in all the out-buildings and
fences, that was not full of shot-holes. This kind of shooting was a
dangerous practice. I wondered, when I examined the premises, that the
barn and sheds had not taken fire from the burning wads. It was
dangerous also to the poultry and cattle. But he thought nothing of
these things; from day to day it was shoot! shoot! shoot!

Pursuing this course, it is not strange that Charles should grow up
rough in his manners, and coarse in his language. Gentleness is lovely
always, wherever found; but it appears most lovely in children and
youth. It indicates a good heart, and good training. It helps young
persons into the best society, and secures them warm and valuable
friends. Roughness of manner drives our friends from us, and prevents
many from becoming friends. This fact is illustrated in the history of
this spoiled boy. He might have had a large circle of friends, but now
few, very few indeed, loved or esteemed him.

One vice does not long remain alone. Idleness begets vice. Viciousness
shows itself in various forms: in lying, Sabbath-breaking, theft,
swearing, and intemperance. Charles grew worse and worse,--adding sin
to sin. He became greatly addicted to swearing. He frequently spent the
Sabbath in wandering about the fields, instead of attending church. He
found, as the depraved always do, kindred spirits, with whom he
associated. With these he learned to drink to excess, and was not
unfrequently under the influence of strong drink.

There is a standard in vice as well as in virtue. While some are held up
as models of virtue, others may be regarded as the very personification
of evil. We should learn to profit by both,--be encouraged by one, and
warned by the other.

The unfortunate boy whose history I am detailing finally became a
proverb in his native town. Good mothers often exhorted their children
not to be like Charles Duran! Who of my little readers would like such a
distinction as this? Try to live so that parents may point you out as
good examples for their children to follow.




CHAPTER VI.

THE FATAL NIGHT.


In country villages, as well as in larger cities, parties often meet for
dancing; and balls are frequently held, especially in the winter season.
Many young people, whose thoughts and time are not better occupied, seem
to derive a great deal of pleasure from such amusements.

These gatherings frequently embrace a large number of the young of both
sexes, from the towns in which they are held, and often many from
neighboring towns. They are usually held at some tavern where rum is
sold. The parties arrive in the forepart of the evening, and the dance
commences at eight, or from eight to nine o'clock, according to
arrangement. Wine, cordials, and other stimulating drinks, are freely
furnished, and freely used. Toward midnight, when chaste young ladies
and sober young men should be at home, the ball-supper is served up.
Rich viands and sparkling drinks are on the table. One becomes drunken,
and another surfeited. The sound of the viol is again heard, and the
merry dance is kept up till near morning light. The parties then
gradually retire. Some of the young ladies, from over excitement in the
ball-chamber, and subsequent exposure to the night air, take severe
colds, become speedily consumptive, and from the place of rioting and
mirth are carried to the grave! In this country, where consumption is
so prevalent, and accomplishes its work so rapidly, the distance from
the midnight ball-room to the grave is very short.

Most young men who attend balls go home inflamed with wine. I say _most_
of them. It is not unfrequently the case, however, that some of them
cannot get home. They have to stay behind until they have, in a measure,
slept off the fumes of strong drink: and then, with bloodshot eyes,
fetid breath, and staggering gait, they reach their homes. Such young
men have received a new impetus in the way that leads to destruction,
and such are the common fruits of a village ball.

Why do fathers and mothers,--and some of them professedly Christian
parents, too,--allow their daughters to mingle in these scenes, and
expose themselves to the contaminating influence of such associations?
How any well-disposed _mother_ can do this I am at a loss to determine.

Such a ball as I have described was to be held in the town of ----.
Young men and young ladies impatiently waited for the time appointed to
arrive. Among those who designed to attend this ball was Charles Duran,
then in his eighteenth year. Notwithstanding his habits and character,
the position and respectability of his parents prevented him from being
entirely excluded from society. He was still further aided in gaining
admission to such parties by always having money. While some despised
him in their heart, they were quite willing, for the sake of his purse,
to have him in their company.

The anxiously looked for day arrived. The preparations were made. At
night the ball was to come off. After dinner, Charles asked his father
for money to bear the expenses of the evening. Mr. Duran gave him what
he thought would be sufficient for the occasion. The amount did not
satisfy him: more was asked. It was refused; and Charles, not having
forgotten his early habits, immediately went into a fit of rage. More
money he wanted, and more he would have. He went out, and arming himself
with stones and blocks, soon commenced a regular assault upon the house.
The weather-boards were battered, one window was smashed in, panes in
the others were broken, and the fragments rattled on the floor and on
the ground. The aged parents trembled for their safety; while the son,
raving as a madman, seemed bent on their destruction. Stooping somewhat
with age, and in great fear, Mr. Duran went to the door, with a bag in
his hand, containing a quantity of specie:--

"Here, Charles," said the feeble old man, "come and get what money you
want, and don't stone the house any more."

Thus appeased, the demon became quiet. Charles helped himself to as much
money as he wanted, and was ready for the ball in the evening. Alas,
what degradation for a parent! and what persevering depravity in a son!

[Illustration: CHARLES TAKING MONEY FOR THE BALL.]

The evening came. Parties began to assemble. Arrangements had been
made for a great ball. The saloon was tastefully decorated. The kitchen
gave evidence that a sumptuous repast was in preparation. The bar was
fully supplied with all kinds of sparkling liquors. As the new-comers
arrived, they met a smiling host, an attentive and ready bar-tender, and
obsequious waiters and servants.

Fancy the scene. Groups of persons, gayly dressed, are in conversation
in different parts of the ball-chamber. More are constantly coming in.
The musicians, who for some time have been tuning their instruments,
enter, and take their place. Partners are selected, the circle is
formed, and the dancing begins. A scene of hilarity ensues. During the
intervals, the merry laugh is heard, wine is drunk, and the glee becomes
general. Sparkling eyes are made more sparkling by strong drink; and,
under the influence of multiplied potations, the coarse jest is now and
then uttered. In this scene of gayety and mirth Charles Duran
mingled,--a prominent actor. A young and inexperienced girl had
accompanied him to the place. Round and round went the dance, and round
and round went Charles's head. He was flush with money, and many a
friend did he treat at the bar. Long ere the festivities closed he was
unable to walk steadily. Still, stimulated by the excitement of the
occasion, and urged on by unprincipled comrades, he poured down the
deadly poison. His brain reeled under its influence. He alternately
roared and laughed as a maniac. "Another drink! another drink!" he said.
His youthful system could endure it no longer: he uttered a moaning,
sepulchral groan, and sunk to the floor!

The ball was over, and the night was nearly gone. A friend took charge
of the thoughtless young girl that had accompanied Charles to the dance.
Two young men, his companions in riot, undertook to convey him to his
father's house. The stars were just beginning to fade away as they
reached the threshold. Speechless, and almost lifeless, they laid him
upon his bed. _It proved his death-bed!_




CHAPTER VII.

SICKNESS AND DEATH.


The debauch of the previous night laid the foundation of disease, from
which Charles never recovered. On the following day he seemed at times
wild, and partially deranged. A violent fever set in, and for many days
he was confined to his bed. His sufferings were extreme; so high did his
fever rise that it seemed as though the fire within would consume him.
His physician watched the progress of his disease, and did all in his
power to restore his health. The fever ran its course, and the crisis
came. There was a change for the better. It was thought that he would
get up. The hopes of his parents were revived; and many were the wishes
that, with restored health, there might be a reformation of manners. Of
this, however, there was little prospect.

These hopes of a recovery were soon cut off. Charles's disease assumed a
new form. He was taken with a cough, and night-sweats followed. His eyes
were a little sunken, but full of expression. His countenance was pale,
and, slightly tinged with blue, gave evidence that consumption had
marked him for its victim, and that the grave must soon swallow him up:
he was rapidly sinking into the arms of death.

Toward the latter part of his sickness, a rude contrivance was adopted
to change his position in bed. Two hooks were driven into the ceiling,
over the foot of the bedstead. To these pulleys were attached. These
pulleys were rigged with cords, one end of which was made fast to the
upper part of the bed. By hoisting on these cords he could be raised to
any desired angle; and, instead of being bolstered up, he hung as if in
a hammock. [See Frontispiece.]

During his illness Charles gave little evidence of any change in his
feelings. No sorrow was expressed for anything in his past conduct. He
was still fretful, still obstinate. He appeared like one early sold to
sin.

The minister of the parish came in to pray with him. He found him
ignorant of spiritual things. He talked to him on the subject of
religion,--urged him to prepare to meet God. He offered prayer by his
bed-side. He left him, however, showing very little evidence of
penitence, and entertaining for him very little hope.

Charles lingered along till early in March. The day of his departure
came. The father and mother bent over his bed: they saw that the hopes
which they entertained at his birth were now to perish. Instead of his
closing their eyes in death, they were now to perform that office for
him. He spoke not. Oppressive stillness reigned in the room. Not a sound
was heard, save the rattling in the throat of the dying youth. The last
breath was drawn; life, for a moment, quivered upon his lip. The spirit
took its flight; and the poor mother, in anguish of soul, exclaimed,
_"He is dead!"_




CHAPTER VIII.

CONCLUSION.


The way of transgressors is hard. Early did Charles Duran indulge in
habits of disobedience,--early was he forgetful of God,--early did he
run into the paths of vice and intemperance, and early did he go down to
his grave.

Disobedience to parents is a fearful sin! Children think they know what
is best for themselves. Parental restraint sometimes seems irksome to
them; but God has wisely ordained that in our youth we should be under
the instruction and control of our parents. Children, instead of feeling
that parental control is oppressive to them, should learn to be
thankful for it. It is enough for well-instructed and well-disposed
children, generally, to know what the wishes of their parents are. Much
of their happiness is derived from compliance with those wishes. The
approbation of their parents will afford such children far more pleasure
than all their forbidden indulgences.

The school history of Charles Duran will not fail, I trust, to make a
suitable impression upon the minds of my youthful readers. Scholars
sometimes think that it is not a great offense for them to violate the
rules of their school, neglect their books, or be unkind even to some of
their school-associates. So this boy thought. The result of his course
is before us. All such children should know that by such a course of
conduct they are laying the foundation for a bad character. They may,
for awhile, escape punishment; they may not be expelled from school;
they may possibly retain their places in their class; but they are
acquiring those habits which, if not corrected, will bring ruin upon
them by and by.

This boy's sporting habits ought not to be lightly passed over. He was
exceedingly fond of a gun. The indulgence of this passion led him into
habits of idleness and cruelty. Boys should rarely, if ever, be allowed
the use of fire-arms: they are always dangerous. The habits and
associations to which their use leads are generally objectionable. Boys
that are constantly around the brooks after little fishes, and in the
woods in pursuit of little birds, had better be at their books. We
always fear that idle boys will make idle men.

We see from the history of Charles Duran the importance of early
religious training. Had his parents pursued a different course with him,
he might have grown up to be a blessing to them, and a useful member of
society: "Train up a child in the way he should go; and when he is old
he will not depart from it." Prov. xxii, 6.

When, O when will parents lay this to heart! How many fathers and
mothers have been brought down to the grave with sorrow, by neglecting
this important duty!

The history of Charles Duran is a warning to all boys who are inclined
to indulge in Sabbath-breaking; to form bad associations; to tipple; or
to visit places of improper amusement. See his dreadful end! Mark that
fatal night! Remember that he had been preparing for that season of riot
and debauch by previous indulgence. He came not to his wretched
condition all at once. He was preparing for it in his early
disobedience,--in his neglect of instruction,--in his unkindness to his
school-mates,--in delighting to injure those who were smaller and weaker
than himself,--in his idle sporting habits,--in the indulgence of his
bad temper,--in ministering to his perverse will,--in his Sunday
rambling,--in associating with the vile,--in his tippling habits,--and,
finally, in throwing off all parental regard and restraint. He had now
come to the verge of the whirlpool of destruction, and, in a frenzied
moment, he threw himself into the awful vortex! _Beware of the first
sin!_ "Enter not into the paths of the wicked, and go not in the way of
evil men. Avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass away." Prov.
iv, 14, 15.




THE END.

ADVERTISEMENTS



BOOKS FOR SUNDAY-SCHOOLS, 200 Mulberry-street, New York.

LIFE OF ADAM CLARKE.
An Account of the Religious and Literary Life of Rev. Adam Clarke, LL.D.
18mo., pp. 223.

PIZARRO;
Or, the Discovery and Conquest of Peru. By GEO. CUBITT. 18mo., pp. 179.

STORIES of RAGGED SCHOOLS
And Ragged Scholars. Four Illustrations. 18mo., pp. 104.

NOAH;
Or the Man of Two Worlds. With the Story of the Deluge. 18mo., pp. 173.

THE PEOPLE OF PERSIA.
By JOHN KITTO, D.D., F.S.A. Three Illustrations. 18mo., pp. 178.

WORK TO DO:
An Account of a Wicked Boy who became Diligent and Pious. 18mo., pp. 73.

THE LIFE OF ESTHER.
By Rev. DANIEL SMITH. 18mo., pp. 126.

LIFE OF JOHN THE BAPTIST.
By Rev. DANIEL SMITH. 18mo., pp. 103.

LIFE OF MRS. COKE.
Memoir of Mrs. Penelope Goulding Coke. By her Husband, the late Rev. DR.
COKE. 18mo., pp. 99.

THE LIFE OF ABRAHAM.
By Rev. DANIEL SMITH. 18mo., pp. 131.

THE ROBY FAMILY;
Or, Battling with the World. A Sequel to the "Giant-Killer." By
A.L.O.E., Author of the "Giant-Killer," etc. Five Illustrations. 18mo.

CHILD'S ANTISLAVERY BOOK.
Containing a few words about American Slave-Children and Stories of
Slave-Life. Ten Illustrations. 18mo.

OUR KATIE;
Or, the Grateful Orphan. A Story for Children. By SARAH A. MYERS. Three
Illustrations. 18mo.

ROSE COTTAGE;
Or, Visits to my Grandmamma. A Nice Little Book for Nice Little Readers.
Five Illustrations. 18mo.

THE BACKWOODS BOY
Who became a Minister; or, the Family and Personal History of Henry
Adolph. By Rev. J.H. PITEZEL, Author of "Lights and Shades of Missionary
Life." Seven Illustrations. 18mo.

GRACE O'GARA,
The Little Mountain-Guide; or, How to be Happy. By the Author of "Johnny
M'Kay," etc. Five Illustrations. 18mo.

MINNIE WINGFIELD
And Polly Bright; or, Wings and Stings. By A.L.O.E., Author of the "Roby
Family," etc. Three Illustrations. 18mo.

THE LIFE OF GEORGE WASHINGTON,
First President of the United States. By S.G. ARNOLD, Author of "Memoirs
of Hannah More." Three Illustrations. 18mo., pp. 228.

CHARACTERS, SCENES, AND INCIDENTS
of the Reformation: from the Rise of the Culdees to the Times of Luther.
18mo., pp. 176.

PLANTS AND TREES OF SCRIPTURE.
With Illustrations. 18mo., pp. 227.

CLOSING SCENES OF HUMAN LIFE.
18mo., pp. 180.

THE VILLAGE SUNDAY-SCHOOL:
With Brief Sketches of Three of its Scholars. By JOHN C. SYMONS. 18mo.,
pp. 64.

CONVERSATIONS ON PALESTINE;
Conversations on the Geography, Natural History, etc., of Palestine. By
IMOGEN MERCEIN. Illustrated. 18mo., pp. 304.

MORAL FABLES AND PARABLES.
By INGRAM COBBIN, M.A. Illustrated. 18mo., pp. 80.

STORIES FROM THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND.
By Rev. ALEXANDER STEWART, a Minister of that Country. 18mo., pp. 159.

THE RECOLLECTIONS OF A MINISTER;
Or, Sketches drawn from Life and Character. By Rev. J.T. BARR. 18mo.,
pp. 92.

MY FIRST SEVEN YEARS IN AMERICA.
By Rev. GEORGE COLES, late Assistant Editor of the Christian Advocate
and Journal, Author of "Lectures to Children," etc. 18mo., pp. 314.

LIFE OF REV. WILLIAM M'KENDREE,
One of the Bishops of the Methodist Episcopal Church. By BENJAMIN ST.
JAMES FRY. 18mo., pp. 197.

LIFE OF REV. RICHARD WHATCOAT,
One of the Bishops of the Methodist Episcopal Church. By BENJAMIN ST.
JAMES FRY. 18mo., pp. 128.

THE MISSIONARY'S DAUGHTER;
Or, the Story of Little Mary's Life. 18mo., pp. 84.

PITHY PAPERS FOR WEEK-DAY READING.
By OLD HUMPHREY. Three Illustrations. 18mo., pp. 219.

AN EXAMPLE FOR YOUNG MEN:
A Memoir of John Daglish. By SAMUEL DUNN. 18mo., pp. 92.

LETTERS TO LITTLE CHILDREN.
Seven Illustrations. 18mo., pp. 110.

APPEARANCE AND PRINCIPLE;
Or, a Sketch of Three Young Ladies at School and in Subsequent Life.
18mo., pp. 56.

ANNIE LEE AND HER IRISH NURSE.
By Mrs. H.C. GARDNER. 18mo., pp. 158.





End of Project Gutenberg's Charles Duran, by The Author of The Waldos

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHARLES DURAN ***

***** This file should be named 15507.txt or 15507.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/5/5/0/15507/

Produced by Internet Archive; University of Florida, PM Childrens
Library, Melissa Er-Raqabi and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
