Project Gutenberg's War Brides: A Play in One Act, by Marion Craig Wentworth

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: War Brides: A Play in One Act

Author: Marion Craig Wentworth

Release Date: January 5, 2005 [EBook #14602]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WAR BRIDES: A PLAY IN ONE ACT ***




Produced by David Garcia, Melissa Er-Raqabi and the PG Online
Distributed Proofreading Team






[Illustration: Good-by! good-by!]




WAR BRIDES

_A Play in One Act_

BY

MARION CRAIG WENTWORTH

ILLUSTRATED WITH PHOTOGRAPHS FROM THE
PLAY AS PRESENTED BY MME. NAZIMOVA


NEW YORK

THE CENTURY CO.

1915




Copyright, 1915, by

THE CENTURY CO.


Acting rights controlled by

DRAMATISTS' PLAY AGENCY,

145 West 45th Street,

NEW YORK CITY


_Published, February 1915_




TO
MY LITTLE BOY
BRANDON










LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

            Good-by! good-by!       _Frontispiece_
                                       FACING PAGE
    Arno:   You are wanted                      42

    Hedwig: Franz?     }
    Amelia: Franz, too }                        62

    Amelia: No, you must not! You have too
            much to live for                    66




This play was first produced
on January 25, 1915, at
B.F. KEITH'S PALACE THEATRE,
NEW YORK CITY,
with the following cast:

    Hedwig (Joan)                  Mme. Nazimova
    Amelia (Amy)                      Mary Alden
    Mother                     Gertrude Berkeley
    Hoffman (Joseph Kerman)       Charles Bryant
    Minna                           Edith Speare
    Arno                                C. Brown
    Hertz (Captain Bragg)         William Hasson

    Peasants, Women and Soldiers.

    Time--Present.    Place--A War-Ridden Country.

    Personal Manager for Madame Nazimova
    William F. Muenster





WAR BRIDES

    The war brides were cheered with enthusiasm and the churches were
    crowded when the wedding parties spoke the ceremony in
    concert.--PRESS CLIPPING.


SCENE: _A room in a peasant's cottage in a war-ridden country. A large
fireplace at the right. Near it a high-backed settle. On the left a
heavy oak table and benches. Woven mats on the floor. A door at left
leads into a bedroom. In the corner a cupboard. At the back a wide
window with scarlet geraniums and an open door. A few firearms are
stacked near the fireplace. There is an air of homely color and neatness
about the room._

_Through the open door may be seen women stacking grain. Others go by
carrying huge baskets of grapes or loads of wood, and gradually it
penetrates the mind that all these workers are women, aristocrats and
peasants side by side. Now and then a bugle blows or a drum beats in the
distance. A squad of soldiers marches quickly by. There is everywhere
the tense atmosphere of unusual circumstance, the anxiety and excitement
of war._

_Amelia, a slight, flaxen-haired girl of nineteen, comes in. She brushes
off the hay with which she is covered, and goes to packing a bag with a
secret, but determined, air. The Mother passes the window and appears in
the doorway. She is old and work-worn, but sturdy and stoical. Now she
carries a heavy load of wood, and is weary. She casts a sharp eye at
Amelia._


_Mother:_

What are you doing, girl? [_Amelia starts and puts the bag in the
cupboard._] Who's going away? They haven't sent for Arno?


_Amelia:_

No.


_Mother:_ [_Sighs, and drops her load on the hearth._]

Is the hay all in?


_Amelia:_

Yes. I put in the last load. All the big work on our place is done, and
so--[_Looks at her mother and hesitates. Her mother begins to chop the
wood into kindling._] I'll do that, Mother.


_Mother:_

Let be, girl. It keeps me from worrying. Get a bite to eat. What were
you doing with that bag? Who were you packing it for?


_Amelia:_ [_With downcast eyes._]

Myself.


_Mother:_ [_Anxious._]

What for?


_Amelia:_

Sit down, Mother, and be still while I tell you--

[_Pushes her mother into a chair._]


_Mother:_ [_Starts._]

Is there any news? Quick! Tell me!


_Amelia:_

Not since yesterday. Only they say Franz is at the front. We don't know
where Emil and Otto are, and there's been a battle; but--


_Mother:_ [_Murmurs, with closed eyes._]

My boys! my boys!


_Amelia:_

Don't, Mother! They may come back. [_A cheer is heard._]


_Mother:_ [_Starting._]

What's that?


_Amelia:_ [_Running to the door and looking out._]

They are cheering the war brides, that's all.


_Mother:_

Aye. There's been another wedding ceremony.


_Amelia:_

Yes.


_Mother:_

How many war brides to-day?


_Amelia:_

Ten, they said.


_Mother:_ [_Nodding._]

Aye, that is good. Has any one asked you, Amelia? [_Amelia looks
embarrassed._] Some one should ask you. You are a good-looking girl.


_Amelia:_ [_In a low voice._]

Hans Hoffman asked me last night.


_Mother:_

The young and handsome lieutenant? You are lucky. You said yes?


_Amelia:_ [_Shakes her head._]

No.


_Mother:_

Ah, well.


_Amelia:_

I hardly know him. I've only spoken to him once before. O Mother--that
isn't what I want to do.


_Mother:_

What did you tell him?


_Amelia:_ [_Timidly._]

That I was going away to join the Red Cross.


_Mother:_

Amelia!


_Amelia:_

He didn't believe me. He kissed me--and I ran away.


_Mother:_

The Red Cross!


_Amelia:_ [_Eagerly._]

Yes; that is what I was going to tell you just now. That is why I was
packing the bag. [_Gets it._] I--I want to go. I want to go to-night. I
can't stand this waiting.


_Mother:_

You leave me, too?


_Amelia:_

I want to go to the front with Franz and Otto and Emil, to nurse them,
to take care of them if they are wounded--and all the others. Let me,
Mother! I, too, must do something for my country. The grapes are
plucked, and the hay is stacked. Hedwig is gathering the wheat. You can
spare me. I have been dreaming of it night and day.


_Mother:_ [_Setting her lips decisively._]

No, Amelia!


_Amelia:_

O Mother, why?


_Mother:_

You must help me with Hedwig. I can't manage her alone.


_Amelia:_

Hedwig!


_Mother:_

She is strange; she broods. Hadn't you noticed?


_Amelia:_

Why, yes; but I thought she was worrying about Franz. She adores him,
and any day she may hear that he is killed. It's the waiting that's so
awful.


_Mother:_

But it's more than the waiting with Hedwig. Aye, you will help Franz
more by staying home to take care of his wife, Amelia, especially now.


_Amelia:_ [_Puzzled._]

_Now?_


_Mother:_ [_Goes to her work-basket._]

Hedwig has told you nothing?


_Amelia:_

No.


_Mother:_

Ah, she is a strange girl! She asked me to keep it a secret,--I don't
know why,--but now I think you should know. See! [_Very proudly she
holds up the tiny baby garments she is knitting._]


_Amelia:_ [_Pleased and astonished._]

So Franz and Hedwig--


_Mother:_ [_Nods._]

For their child. In six months now. My first grandchild, Amelia. Franz's
boy, perhaps. I shall hear a little one's voice in this house again.


_Amelia:_ [_Uncertainly, as she looks at the little things._]

Still--I want to go.


_Mother_: [_Firmly._]

We must take care of Hedwig, Amelia. She is to be a mother. That is our
first duty. It is our only hope of an heir if you won't marry soon--and
if--if the boys don't come back.


_Amelia:_

Arno is left.


_Mother:_

Ah, but they'll be calling him next. It is his birthday to-day, too,
poor lad. He's on the jump to be off. I see him gone, too. God knows I
may never see one of them again. I sit here in the long evenings and
think how death may take my boys,--even this minute they may be
breathing their last,--and then I knit this baby sock and think of the
precious little life that's coming. It's my one comfort, Amelia. Nothing
must happen now.


_Amelia:_ [_With a touch of impatience._]

What's the matter with Hedwig?


_Mother:_

I don't know what it is. She acts as if she didn't want to bring her
child into the world. She talks wild. I tell you I must have that child,
Amelia! I cannot live else. Hedwig frightens me. The other night I found
her sitting on the edge of her bed staring,--when she should have been
asleep,--as if she saw visions, and whispering, "I will send a message
to the emperor." What message? I had to shake her out of it. She refuses
to make a thing for her baby. Says, "Wait till I see what they do to
Franz." It's unnatural.


_Amelia:_

I can't understand her. I never could. I always thought it was because
she was a factory-town girl.


_Mother:_

If anything should happen to Franz in the state she's in now, Hedwig
might go out of her mind entirely. So you had best stay by, Amelia. We
must keep a close eye on her.

[_There is a knock at the door._]

Who's that?


_Amelia:_ [_Looks out of the windows, and then whispers._]

It's Hans Hoffman.

[_The knock is repeated._]


_Mother:_

Open, girl! Don't stand there!

[_Enter Hoffman, gay, familiar, inclined to stoutness, but
good-looking. Accustomed to having the women bow down to him._]


_Hoffman:_

[_To Amelia._] Ah, ha! You gave me the slip yesterday!


_Amelia:_

My mother.


_Hoffman:_ [_Nodding._]

Good day, Mother. [_She curtsies._]

[_Coming closer to Amelia._]

Where did you run to? Here she as good as promised me she would wed me
to-day, Mother, and then--


_Amelia:_

Oh, no!


_Hoffman:_

Yes, you did. You let me kiss you.


_Amelia:_ [_Taken aback._]

Oh, sir!


_Hoffman:_

And when I got to the church square to-day, no bride for Hans Hoffman.
Well, I must say, they had the laugh on me; for I had told them I had
found the girl for me--the prettiest bride of the lot. But to-morrow--


_Amelia:_

I can't.


_Hoffman:_ [_Taking hold of her._]

Oh, yes, you can. I won't bother you long. I'm off to the front any day
now. Come, promise me! What do you say, Mother?


_Mother:_ [_Slowly._]

I should like to see her wed.


_Hoffman:_

There!


_Amelia:_ [_Shrinking from both him and the idea._]

But I don't know you well enough yet.


_Hoffman:_

Well, look me over. Don't you think I am good enough for her, Mother?
Besides, we can't stop to think of such things now, Amelia. It is
war-time. This is an emergency measure. And, then, I'm a soldier--like
to die for my country. That ought to count for something--a good deal, I
should say--if you love your country, and you do, don't you, Amelia?


_Amelia:_

Oh, yes!


_Hoffman:_

Well, then, we can get married and get acquainted afterward.


_Amelia:_ [_Faintly._]

I wanted to be a nurse.


_Hoffman:_

Nonsense! Pretty girls like you should marry. The priests and the
generals have commanded it. It's for the fatherland. Ought she not to
wed me, Mother?


_Mother:_ [_Nodding impersonally._]

Aye, it is for the fatherland they ask it.


_Hoffman:_

Of course. It is your patriotic duty, Amelia. You're funny. All the
young women are tickled at the chance. But you are the one I have picked
out, and I am going to have you. Now, there's a good girl--promise!

[_A hubbub of voices and a cheer are heard outside side. Enter Minna,
flushed, pretty, light headed._]


_Amelia:_

Minna!


_Minna:_ [_Holding out her hand._]

Amelia, see! My wedding-ring!


_Amelia:_

Iron!


_Minna:_ [_Triumphantly._]

Yes; a war bride!


_Amelia:_

You?


_Minna:_

That's what I am. [_Whirling gaily about._]


_Hoffman:_ [_Shaking her hand._]

Good for you! Congratulations!


_Minna:_

Didn't you hear them cheer? That was for me!


_Hoffman:_

There's patriotism for you, Amelia!


_Amelia:_

When were you married, Minna?


_Minna:_

Just now. There were ten of us. We all answered in chorus. It was
fun--just like a theater. Then the priest made a speech, and the
burgomaster and the captain. The people cheered, and then our husbands
had to go to drill for an hour. Oh, I never was so thrilled! It was
grand! They told us we were the true patriots.


_Hoffman:_

Hurrah! And so you are.


_Minna:_

Our names will go down in history, honored by a whole people, they said.

[_They are all carried away by Minna's enthusiasm; even Amelia warms
up._]


_Amelia:_

But whom did you marry, Minna?


_Minna:_

Heinrich Berg.


_Amelia:_ [_Dubious._]

That loafer!


_Minna:_

He's all right. He's a soldier now. Why, he may be a hero, fighting for
the fatherland; and that makes a lot of difference, Amelia.


_Hoffman:_

What did I tell you?


_Minna:_

I probably wouldn't have picked him out in peace-times, but it is
different now. He only asked me last night. Of course he may get killed.
They said we'd have a widow's pension fund,--us and our
children,--forever and ever, if the boys didn't come back. So, you see,
I won't be out anything. Anyway, it's for the country. We'll be famous,
as war brides. Even the name sounds glorious, doesn't it? War bride!
Isn't that fine?


_Hoffman:_

Here's a little lady who will hear herself called that to-morrow.
[_Takes Amelia's hand._]


_Minna:_ [_Clapping her hands._]

Amelia a war bride, too! Good!


_Hoffman:_

You'll be proud to hear her called that, won't you, Mother? Give us your
blessing.


_Minna:_

I'd rather be a wife or a widow any day than be an old maid; and to be a
war bride--oh!

[_Amelia is blushing and tremulous._]


_Mother:_ [_With a far-away look._]

It is for the fatherland, Amelia. Aye, aye, the masters have said so. It
is the will and judgment of those higher than us. They are wise. Our
country will need children. Aye. Say yes, my daughter. You will not say
no when your country bids you! It is your emperor, your country, who
asks, more than Hans Hoffman.


_Amelia:_ [_Impressed, and questions herself to see if her patriotism
is strong enough to stand the test, while Hoffman, charmed by Amelia's
gentleness, is moved by more personal feeling._]


_Hoffman:_ [_Kissing Amelia on both cheeks._]

There, it's all settled. [_A faint cheer is heard without._] To-morrow
they will cheer you like that; and when I go, I shall have a bride to
wave me good-by instead of--

[_Enter Hedwig._

_She stands in the doorway, looking out on the distant crowds. She is
tall, well built, and carries herself proudly. Strong, intelligent
features, but pale. Her eyes are large with anxiety. She has soft, wavy
black hair. An inward flame seems to be consuming her.

The sounds continue in the distance, cheering, disputing mingled with
far bugle-calls and marching feet._]


_Hedwig:_ [_Contemptuously._]

Ha!

[_The sound startles the others. They turn._]


_All:_

Hedwig!


_Hedwig:_

[_Still in the doorway, looking out._]

War brides!


_Minna:_ [_Pertly._]

You're a war bride yourself, Hedwig.


_Hedwig:_ [_Turns quickly, locates Minna, almost springs at her._]

Don't you dare to call me a war bride! My ring is gold. See. [_Seizes
Minna's hand, and then throws it from her._] Not iron, like yours.


_Minna:_

[_Boldly taunting._]

They even call you the first war bride.


_Hedwig:_ [_Furious, towering over her, her hand on her shoulder._]

Say why, why?


_Minna:_ [_Weakening._]

Because you were the first one to be married when the war broke out.


_Hedwig:_ [_Both hands on her shoulders._]

Because the Government commanded? Because they bribed me with the
promise of a widow's pension? Tell the truth.


_Minna:_ [_Faintly._]

No. Let me go.


_Hedwig:_

So! And how long had Franz and I been engaged? Now say.


_Minna:_ [_Beginning to be frightened._]

Two years.


_Hedwig:_ [_Flinging her off._]

Of course. Everybody knows it. Every village this side the river knew we
were to be married this summer. We've dreamed and worked for nothing
else all these months. It had nothing to do with the war--our love, our
marriage. So, you see, I am no war bride. [_Walks scornfully away._] Not
like you, anyway.

[_They all stare at her._]


_Hoffman:_ [_Stepping forward indignantly._]

I don't know why you should have this contempt for our war brides, and
speak like that.


_Hedwig:_ [_Sits down, half turned away. She shrugs her shoulders, and
her lips curl in a little smile._]


_Hoffman:_

They are coming to the rescue of their country. Saving it; else it will
perish.


_Hedwig:_ [_Bitterly._]

Ha!


_Hoffman:_ [_Waxing warmer._]

They are the saviors of the future.


_Hedwig:_ [_Sadly._]

The future!


_Mother:_ [_Softly, laying her hand on Hedwig's shoulder._]

Hedwig, be more respectful. Herr Hoffman is a lieutenant.


_Hoffman:_

When we are gone,--the best of us,--what will the country do if it has
no children?


_Hedwig:_

Why didn't you think of that before--before you started this wicked war?


_Hoffman:_

I tell you it is a glory to be a war bride. There!


_Hedwig:_ [_With a shrug._]

A breeding-machine! [_They all draw back._] Why not call it what it is?
Speak the naked truth for once.


_Hoffman:_

You'll take that back to-morrow, when your sister stands up in the
church with me.


_Hedwig:_ [_Starting up._]

Amelia? Marry you? No! Amelia, is this true?


_Amelia:_ [_Hesitating, troubled, and uncertain._]

They tell me I must--for the fatherland.


_Hedwig:_

Marry this man, whom you scarcely know, whom surely you cannot love!
Why, you make a mock of marriage! It isn't that they have tempted you
with the widow's pension? It is so tiny; it's next to nothing. Surely
you wouldn't yield to that?


_Amelia:_ [_Frightened._]

I did want to go as a nurse, but the priests and the generals--they say
we must marry--to--for the fatherland, Hedwig.


_Hoffman:_ [_To Hedwig._]

I command you to be silent!


_Hedwig:_

Not when my sister's happiness is at stake. If you come back, she will
have to live with you the rest of her life.


_Hoffman:_

That isn't the question now. We are going away--the best of us--to be
shot, most likely. Don't you suppose we want to send some part of
ourselves into the future, since we can't live ourselves? There, that's
straight; and right, too.


_Hedwig:_ [_Nodding slowly._]

What I said--to breed a soldier for the empire; to restock the land.
[_Fiercely._] And for what? For food for the next generation's cannon.
Oh, it is an insult to our womanhood! You violate all that makes
marriage sacred! [_Agitated, she walks about the room._] Are we women
never to get up out of the dust? You never asked us if we wanted this
war, yet you ask us to gather in the crops, cut the wood, keep the world
going, drudge and slave, and wait, and agonize, lose our all, and go on
bearing more men--and more--to be shot down! If we breed the men for
you, why don't you let us say what is to become of them? Do we want them
shot--the very breath of our life?


_Hoffman:_

It is for the fatherland.


_Hedwig:_

You use us, and use us--dolls, beasts of burden, and you expect us to
bear it forever dumbly; but I won't! I shall cry out till I die. And now
you say it almost out loud, "Go and breed for the empire." War brides!
Pah! [_Minna gasps, beginning to be terrified. Hoffman rages. Mother
gazes with anxious concern. Amelia turns pale._]


_Hoffman:_

I never would dream of speaking of Amelia like that. She is the sweetest
girl I have seen for many a day.


_Hedwig:_

What will happen to Amelia? Have you thought of that? No; I warrant you
haven't. Well, look. A few kisses and sweet words, the excitement of
the ceremony, the cheers of the crowd, some days of living together,--I
won't call it marriage, for Franz and I are the ones who know what real
marriage is, and how sacred it is,--then what? Before you know it, an
order to march. Amelia left to wait for her child. No husband to wait
with her, to watch over her. Think of her anxiety, if she learns to love
you! What kind of child will it be? Look at me. What kind of child would
_I_ have, do you think? I can hardly breathe for thinking of my Franz,
waiting, never knowing from minute to minute. From the way I feel, I
should think my child would be born mad, I'm that wild with worrying.
And then for Amelia to go through the agony alone! No husband to help
her through the terrible hour. What solace can the state give then? And
after that, if you don't come back, who is going to earn the bread for
her child? Struggle and struggle to feed herself and her child; and the
fine-sounding name you trick us with--war bride! Humph! that will all be
forgotten then. Only one thing can make it worth while, and do you know
what that is? Love. We'll struggle through fire and water for that; but
without it--[_Gesture._]


_Hoffman:_ [_Drawing Amelia to him._]

Don't listen to her, Amelia.


_Amelia:_ [_Pushing Hoffman violently from her, runs from the room._]

No, no, I can't marry you! I won't! I won't!

[_She shuts the door in his face._]


_Hedwig:_ [_Triumphantly._]

She will never be your war bride, Hans Hoffman!


_Hoffman:_ [_Suddenly, angrily._]

By thunder! I've made a discovery. You're the woman! You're the woman!


_Hedwig:_

What woman?


_Hoffman:_

Yesterday there were twenty war brides. The day before there were nearly
thirty. To-day there were only ten. There are rumors--[_Excitedly._]
I'll report you. They'll find you guilty. I myself can prove it.


_Hedwig:_

Well?


_Hoffman:_

I heard them say at the barracks that some one was talking the women out
of marrying. They didn't know who; but they said if they caught
her--caught any one talking as you have just now, daring to question the
wisdom of the emperor and his generals, the church, too,--she'd be
guilty of treason. You are working against the emperor, against the
fatherland. Here you have done it right before my very eyes; you have
taken Amelia right out of my arms. You're the woman who's been upsetting
the others, and don't you deny it.


_Hedwig:_

Deny it? I am proud of it.


_Hoffman:_

Then the place for you is in jail. Do you know what will be the end of
you?


_Hedwig:_ [_Suddenly far away._]

Yes, I know, if Franz does not come back. I know; but first [_Clenching
her hands_] I must get my message to the emperor.


_Hoffman:_ [_Very angry._]

You will be shot for treason.


_Hedwig:_ [_Coming back, laughing slightly._]

Shot? Oh, no, Herr Hans, you'd never shoot me!


_Hoffman:_

Why not?


_Hedwig:_

Do I have to tell you, stupid? I am a woman: I can get in the crops; I
can keep the country going while you are away fighting, and, most
important, I might give you a soldier for your next army--for the
kingdom. Don't you see my value? [_Laughs strangely._] Oh, no, you'd
never shoot me!


_Mother:_

There, there, don't excite her, sir.


_Hedwig:_ [_Her head in her hands, on the table._]

God! I wish you would shoot me! If you don't give me back my Franz! I've
no mind to bring a son into the world for this bloody thing you call
war.


_Hoffman:_

I am going straight to headquarters to report you.

[_Starts to go.

Enter Arno excitedly. He is boyish and fair, in his early twenties, and
looks even younger than he really is._]


_Arno:_ [_To Hoffman._]

There's an order to march at once--your regiment.


_Hoffman:_

Now?


_Arno:_

At once. You are wanted. They told me to tell you.

[Illustration: ARNO: You are wanted.]

[_Hoffman moves with military precision to the door; then turns to
Hedwig._]


_Hoffman:_

I shall take the time to report you.

[_Goes._]


_Minna:_ [_To Arno._]

Does Heinrich's regiment go, too?


_Arno:_

Heinrich who?


_Minna:_

Heinrich Berg.


_Arno:_

No. To-morrow.

[_Minna, now thoroughly scared, is slinking to the door when Hedwig
stops her._]


_Hedwig:_

Ha! little Minna, why do you run so fast? Heinrich does not go until
to-morrow. [_Looks at her thoughtfully._] Are you going to be able to
fight it through, little Minna, when the hard days come? If you do give
the empire a soldier, will it be any comfort to know you are helping the
falling birth-rate?


_Minna:_ [_Shivering._]

Oh, I am afraid of you!


_Hedwig:_

Afraid of the truth, you mean. You see it at last in all its brutal
bareness. Poor little Minna! [_She puts her arm around Minna with
sudden tenderness._] But you need not be afraid of me, little Minna. Oh,
no. The trouble with me is I want no more war. Franz is at the war. I'm
half mad with dreaming they have killed him. Any moment I may hear. If
you loved your man as I do mine, little Minna, you'd understand.' Well,
go now, and to-morrow say good-by to your husband--of a day.

[_Minna, with a frightened backward glance, runs out the door.

Arno, who has been talking in low tones to his mother, now rises._]


_Arno:_

Well, Mother, I haven't much time.

[_She clings to his hand._]


_Hedwig:_ [_Starting._]

Arno!


_Arno:_

I am going, too. Get those little things for me, Mother, will you?


_Mother:_ [_Goes to door and calls._]

Amelia! Come. Arno has been called. [_Amelia comes in. Each in turn
embraces him, sadly, but bravely. Then the mother and sister gather
together handkerchiefs, linen, writing-pad and pencil, and small
necessaries._]


_Arno:_

I have only a few minutes.


_Hedwig:_ [_Tenderly._]

Arno, my little brother, oh, why--why must you go? You seem so young.


_Arno:_

I'm a man, like the others; don't forget that, Hedwig. Be brave--to
help me to be brave.

[_They sit on the settle._]


_Hedwig:_ [_Sighing._]

Yes, it cannot be helped. Will you see my Franz, Arno? You look so like
him to-day--the day I first saw him in the fields, the day of the
factory picnic. It seems long ago. Tell him how happy he made me, and
how I loved him. He didn't believe in this war no more than I, yet he
had to go. He dreaded lest he meet his friends on the other side. You
remember those two young men from across the border? They worked all one
winter side by side in the factory with Franz. They went home to join
their regiments when the war was let loose on us. He never could stand
it, Franz couldn't, if he were ordered to drive his bayonet into them.
[_Gets up, full of emotion that is past expression._] Oh, it is too
monstrous! And for what--for what?


_Arno:_

It is our duty. We belong to the fatherland. I would willingly give my
life for my country.


_Hedwig:_

I would willingly give mine for peace.


_Arno:_

I must go. Good-by, Hedwig.


_Hedwig:_ [_Controlling her emotion as she kisses him._]

Good-by, my brave, splendid little brother.


_Amelia:_

I may come to the front, too.

[_They embrace tenderly._]


_Mother:_ [_Strong and quiet, unable to speak, holds his head against
her breast for a moment._]

Fight well, my son.


_Arno:_

Yes, Mother.

[_He tears himself away. The silent suffering of the mother is pitiful.
Her hands are crossed on her breast, her lips are seen to move in
prayer. It is Hedwig who takes her in her arms and comforts her._]


_Hedwig:_

And this is war--to tear our hearts out like this! Make mother some tea,
Amelia, can't you?

[_Amelia prepares the cup of tea for her mother._]


_Mother:_ [_After a few moments composes herself._]

There, I am right now. I must remember--and you must help me, my
daughters--it is for the fatherland.


_Hedwig:_ [_On her knees by the fire, shakes her head slowly._]

I wonder, I wonder. O Mother, I'm not patient like you. I couldn't stand
it. To have a darling little baby and see him grow into a man, and then
lose him like this! I'd rather never see the face of my child.


_Mother:_

We have them for a little while. I am thankful to God for what I have
had.


_Hedwig:_

Then I must be very wicked.


_Mother:_

Are you sleeping better now, child?


_Hedwig:_


No; I am thinking of Franz. He may be lying there alone on the
battle-field, with none to help, and I here longing to put my arms
around him.

[_Buries her face on the mother's knees and sobs._]


_Mother:_

Hush, Hedwig! Be brave! Take care of yourself! We must see that Franz's
child is well born.


_Hedwig:_

If Franz returns, yes; if not--I--

[_Gets up impulsively, as if to run out of the house._]


_Amelia:_

Don't you want your tea, Hedwig?

[_Hedwig throws open the door, and suddenly confronts a man who
apparently was about to enter the house. He is an official, the military
head of the town, known as Captain Hertz. He is well along in years,
rheumatic, but tremendously self-important._]


_Hertz:_ [_Stopping Hedwig._]

Wait one moment. You are the young woman I wish to see. You don't get
away from me like that.


_Hedwig:_ [_Drawing herself up, moves back a step or two._]

What is it?


_Hertz:_ [_Turning to the old mother._]

Well, Maria, another son must go--Arno. You are an honored woman, a
noble example to the state. [_Turns to Amelia._] You have lost a very
good husband, I understand. Well, you are a foolish girl. As for you
[_Turning to Hedwig, and eyeing her critically and severely_], I hear
pretty bad things. Yes, you have been talking to the women--telling them
not to marry, not to multiply. In so doing you are working directly
against the Government. It is the express request and command that our
soldiers about to be called to the front and our young women should
marry. You deliberately set yourself in opposition to that command. Are
you aware that that is treason?


_Hedwig:_

Why are they asking this, Herr Captain?


_Hertz:_

Our statesmen are wise. They are thinking of the future state. The
nation is fast being depopulated. We must take precautionary measures.
We must have men for the future. I warn you, that to do or say anything
which subverts the plan of the empire for its own welfare, especially at
a time when our national existence is in peril--well, it is treason.
Were it not that you are the daughter-in-law of my old friend
[_Indicating the Mother_], I should not take the trouble to warn you,
but pack you off to jail at once. Not another word from you, you
understand?


_Hedwig:_ [_Calmly, even sweetly, but with fire in her eye._]

If I say I will keep quiet, will you promise me something in return?


_Hertz:_

What do you mean? Quiet? Of course you'll keep quiet. Quiet as a
tombstone, if I have anything to say about it.


_Hedwig:_ [_Calm and tense._]

I mean what I say. Promise to see to it that if we bear you the men for
your nation, there shall be no more war. See to it that they shall not
go forth to murder and be murdered. That is fair. We will do our
part,--we always have,--will you do yours? Promise.


_Hertz:_

I--I--ridiculous! There will always be war.


_Hedwig:_

Then one day we will stop giving you men. Look at mother. Four sons torn
from her in one month, and none of you ever asked her if she wanted
war. You keep us here helpless. We don't want dreadnoughts and armies
and fighting, we women. You tear our husbands, our sons, from us,--you
never ask us to help you find a better way,--and haven't we anything to
say?


_Hertz:_

No. War is man's business.


_Hedwig:_

Who gives you the men? We women. We bear and rear and agonize. Well, if
we are fit for that, we are fit to have a voice in the fate of the men
we bear. If we can bring forth the men for the nation, we can sit with
you in your councils and shape the destiny of the nation, and say
whether it is to war or peace we give the sons we bear.


_Hertz:_ [_Chuckling._]

Sit in the councils? That would be a joke. I see. Mother, she's a
little--[_Touches his forehead suggestively._] Sit in the councils with
the men and shape the destiny of the nation! Ha! ha!


_Hedwig:_

Laugh, Herr Captain, but the day will come; and then there will be no
more war. No, you will not always keep us here, dumb, silent drudges. We
will find a way.


_Hertz:_ [_Turning to the mother._]

That is what comes of letting Franz go to a factory town, Maria. That is
where he met this girl. Factory towns breed these ideas. [_To Hedwig._]
Well, we'll have none of that here. [_Authoritatively._] Another word
of this kind of insurrection, another word to the women of your
treason, and you will be locked up and take your just punishment. You
remember I had to look out for you in the beginning when you talked
against this war. You're a firebrand, and you know how we handle the
like of you. [_Goes to door, turns to the mother._] I am sorry you have
to have this trouble, Maria, on top of everything else. You don't
deserve it. [_To Hedwig._] You have been warned. Look out for yourself.

[_Hedwig is standing rigid, with difficulty repressing the torrent of
her feelings. Drums are heard coming nearer, and singing voices of men._]


_Amelia:_ [_At door._]

They are passing this way.


_Hedwig:_

Wave to Arno. Come, Mother. Ah, how quickly they go!

[_The official steps out of the door. There is quick rhythm of marching
feet as the departing regiment passes not very far from the house._]

There he is! Wave, Mother. Good-by! good-by!

[_The women stand in the doorway, waving their sad farewells, smiling
bravely. The sounds grow less and less, until there is the usual
silence._]

In another month, in another week, perhaps, all the men will be gone. We
will be a village of women. Not a man left.

[_She leads the old mother into the house once more._]


_Hertz:_ [_In the door._]

What did you say?


_Hedwig:_

Not a man left, I said.


_Hertz:_

You forget. _I_ shall be here.


_Hedwig:_

You are old. You don't count. They think you are only a woman, Herr
Captain.


_Hertz:_ [_Insulted._]

You--you--


_Hedwig:_

Oh, don't take it badly, sir. You are honored. Is the name of woman
always to be despised? Look out in those fields. Who cleared them, and
plucked the vineyards clean? You think we are left at home because we
are weak. Ah, no; we are strong. That is why. Strong to keep the world
going, to keep sacred the greatest things in life--love and home and
work. To remind men of--peace. [_With a quick change._] If only you
really were a woman, Herr Captain, that you might breed soldiers for the
empire, your glory would be complete.

[_The old captain is about to make an angry reply when there is a
commotion outside. The words "News from the front" are distinguished,
growing more distinct. The captain rushes out. The women are paralyzed
with apprehension for a moment._]


_Mother:_

Amelia, go and see. Hedwig, come here.

[_Hedwig crouches on the floor close to the mother, her eyes wide with
dread. In a few moments Amelia returns, dragging her feet, woe in her
face, and unable to deal the blow which must fall on the two women, who
stare at her with blanched faces._]


_Amelia:_ [_Falling at her mother's knee._]

Mother!


_Mother:_ [_Scarcely breathing._]

Which one?


_Amelia:_

All of them.


_Mother:_ [_Dazed._]

All? All my boys?


_Amelia:_

Emil, Otto--be thankful Arno is left.

[_The Mother drops her head back against the chair and silently prays.
Hedwig creeps nearer Amelia and holds her face between her hands,
looking into her eyes._]


_Hedwig:_ [_Whispering._]

Franz?


_Amelia:_

Franz, too.

[Illustration: HEDWIG: Franz?

AMELIA: Franz, too.]

[_Hedwig lies prostrate on the floor. Their grief is very silent;
terrible because it is so dumb and stoical. The Mother is the first to
rouse herself. She bends over Hedwig._]


_Mother:_

Hedwig. [_Hedwig sobs convulsively._] Don't, child. Be careful for the
little one's sake. [_Hedwig sits up._] For your child be quiet, be
brave.


_Hedwig:_

I loved him so, Mother!


_Mother:_

Yes, he was my boy--my first-born.


_Hedwig:_

Your first-born, and this is the end.

[_She rises up in unutterable wrath and despair._]

O God!


_Mother:_ [_Anxious for her._]

Promise me you will be careful, Hedwig. For the sake of your child,
_your_ first-born, that is to be--


_Hedwig:_

_My child_? For this end? For the empire--the war that is to be? No!


_Mother:_ [_Half to herself._]

He may look like Franz.

[_Hedwig quickly seizes the pistol from the mantel-shelf and moves to
the bedroom door._

_Amelia, watching her, sees her do it, and cries out in alarm and
rushes to take it from her._]


_Amelia:_ [_In horror._]

Hedwig! What are you doing? Give it to me! No, you must not! You have
too much to live for.

[Illustration: AMELIA: No, you must not! You have too much to live for.]


_Hedwig:_ [_Dazed._]

To live for? Me?


_Amelia:_

Why, yes, you are going to be a mother.


_Hedwig:_

A mother? Like her? [_Looks sadly at the bereaved old mother._] Look at
her! Poor Mother! And they never asked her if she wanted this thing to
be! Oh, no! I shall never take it like that--never! But you are right,
Amelia. I have something to do first.

[_Lets Amelia put the pistol away in the cupboard._] I must send a
message to the emperor. [_The others are more alarmed for her in this
mood than in her grief._]

You said you were going to the front to be a nurse, Amelia. Can you take
this message for me? I might take it myself, perhaps.


_Amelia:_ [_Hesitating, not knowing what to say or do._]

Let me give you some tea, Hedwig.

[_Voices are heard outside, and the sounds of sorrow. Some one near the
house is weeping. A wild look and a fierce resolve light Hedwig's
face._]


_Hedwig:_ [_Rushing from the house._]

They have taken my Franz!


_Mother:_

Get her back! I feared it. Grief has made her mad.

[_Amelia runs out. A clamor of voices outside. Hedwig can be heard
indistinctly speaking to the women. Finally her voice alone is heard,
and in a moment she appears, backing into the doorway, still talking to
the women._]


_Hedwig:_ [_A tragic light in her face, and hand uplifted._]

I shall send a message to the emperor. If ten thousand women send one
like it, there will be peace and no more war. Then they will hear our
tears.


_A Voice:_

What is the message? Tell us!


_Hedwig:_

Soon you will know. [_Loudly._] But I tell you now, _don't bear any more
children_ until they promise you there will be no more war.


_Hertz:_ [_Suddenly appearing. Amelia follows._]

I heard you. I declare you under arrest. Come with me. You will be shot
for treason.


_Mother:_ [_Fearfully, drawing him aside._]

Don't say that, sir. Wait. Oh, no, you can't do that!

[_She gets out her work-basket, and shows him the baby things she has
been knitting, and glances significantly at Hedwig. A horrid smile comes
into the man's face. Hedwig, snatches the things and crushes them to her
breast as if sacrilege had been committed._]


_Hertz:_

Is this true? You expect--


_Hedwig:_ [_Proudly, scornfully._]

You will not shoot me if I give you a soldier for your empire and your
armies and your guns, will you, Herr Captain?


_Hertz:_

Why--eh, no. Every child counts these times. But we will put you under
lock and key. You are a firebrand. I warned you. Come along.


_Hedwig:_

You want my child, but still you will not promise me what I asked you.
Well, we shall see.


_Hertz:_

Come along.


_Hedwig:_

Give me just a moment. I want to send a message to the emperor. Will you
take it for me, Herr Captain?


_Mother:_ [_Signing._]

Humor her.


_Hertz:_

Well, well, hurry up!

[_Hedwig sits at table and writes a brief note._]


_Mother:_ [_Whispering._]

She has lost Franz. She is crazed.


_Hedwig:_ [_Rising._]

There. See that it is placed in the hands of the emperor. [_Gives him
the note._] Good-by, Amelia! Never be a war bride, Amelia.

[_Kisses her three times_,] Good-by, Mother.

[_Embraces her tenderly._] Thank you for these.

[_She gathers the baby things in her hands, crosses the room, pressing a
little sock to her lips. As she passes the cupboard she deftly seizes
the pistol, and moves into the bedroom. On the threshold she looks over
her shoulder._]


_Hedwig:_ [_Firmly._]

You may read the message out loud.

[_She disappears into the room, still pressing the little sock to her
lips._]


_Hertz:_ [_Reading the note._]

"A Message to the Emperor: I refuse to bear my child until you promise
there shall be no more war."

[_A shot is fired in the bedroom. They rush into the room. The Mother
stands trembling by the table._]


_Hertz:_ [_Awed, coming out of the room with the baby things, which he
places on the table._]

Dead! Tcha! tcha! she was mad. I will hush it up, Maria.

[_He tears up Hedwig's message to the emperor, and goes out of the
house, shaking his head. Amelia is kneeling in the doorway of the
bedroom, bending over something, and softly crying. The Mother slowly
gathers up the pieces of Hedwig's message and the baby garments, now
dashed with blood, and, sitting on the bench, holds them tight against
her breast, staring straight in front of her, her lips moving
inaudibly. She closes her eyes and rocks to and fro, still muttering and
praying._]




CURTAIN





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of War Brides: A Play in One Act
by Marion Craig Wentworth

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WAR BRIDES: A PLAY IN ONE ACT ***

***** This file should be named 14602.txt or 14602.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/4/6/0/14602/

Produced by David Garcia, Melissa Er-Raqabi and the PG Online
Distributed Proofreading Team


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
