The Project Gutenberg EBook of Society for Pure English Tract 1 (Oct 1919)
by Society for Pure English

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Society for Pure English Tract 1 (Oct 1919)

Author: Society for Pure English

Release Date: May 15, 2004 [EBook #12358]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOCIETY FOR PURE ENGLISH ***




Produced by David Starner, Project Manager; Keith M. Eckrich,
Post-Proofer; the Online Distributed Proofreaders Team





_SOCIETY for PURE ENGLISH_ (_S.P.E_).



_TRACT No. I_


Preliminary Announcement

&

List of Members

Oct. 1919

_At the Clarendon Press_

MDCCCCXIX



SOCIETY for PURE ENGLISH (S.P.E.)


The Society was founded in 1913, and was preparing to enter on its
activities, when the declaration of war in Aug. 1914 determined the
Committee to suspend proceedings until the national distraction should
have abated. They met again after the Armistice in 1918 and agreed to
announce their first issues for October 1919. Although present
conditions are not as favourable as could be wished, it would seem
that the public are disposed to attend to literary matters, and that
the war has even quickened the interest and increased the number of
those to whom the special objects of the Society will be most
intelligible and attractive.

A false start is a misfortune, and recovery from its confusion must
have an awkward appearance, for which it is needless to make further
apology or explanation.


1. THE TITLE OF THE SOCIETY.

In calling itself the Society for Pure English it was not overlooked
that the word Pure might carry a wrong suggestion. It should be
explained that it does not denote, as it is sometimes used to denote,
the idea that words of foreign origin are _impurities_ in English; it
rather assumes that they are not; and the Committee, whether wisely or
unwisely, thought a short title of general import was preferable to a
definition which would misrepresent their purpose by its necessary
limitations.


2. FINANCIAL.

The founders were originally confident that they could carry on their
work without asking for any subscription from the members; and
although the conditions of prices and commodities are now wholly
changed and altogether unfavourable, they still hope that they may be
able to keep to their scheme. If the publications of the Society are
of sufficient merit, their profits should cover the expenses of an
unsalaried staff; and though it shall be optional for their authors to
retain a share of such prospective profits, it is hoped that most of
those who contribute their work will be willing to allow all the
profits to go into the funds of the Society. In the place of a small
subscription, which it is as inconvenient regularly to collect as it
is to pay, the secretary invites donations of any amount, great or
small, which will be duly acknowledged and deposited in the Society's
banking account. The sympathetic response to their prospectus warrants
the belief that more donations will be forthcoming. The Society having
a finite aim may, after a few years of activity, consider its
usefulness to be at an end; and if, when it is wound up, it should
have a balance in hand, the present Committee undertake to pay such a
balance into the Pension Fund of the Society of Authors.


3. PUBLICATIONS.

The Society undertakes to publish a series of tracts on the subjects
which it is founded to deal with.

It is impossible to foresee the quality or amount of such expert
contributions; but the Committee intend to issue at least a quarterly
paper which shall contain a report of proceedings up to date.
Meanwhile the two first tracts are sent gratis to all the present
members. Later issues will be announced in the literary journals, and
members will be expected to buy them unless they shall pre-contract to
have them supplied as they are issued, which may be done by a donation
to the Society at the rate of 10s. a year. The tracts will be issued
by the Oxford University Press.


4. MANAGEMENT.

The original Committee will continue to carry on until it is
convenient to call a meeting of the members to relieve them of their
responsibility; and it is their plan that the members should
ultimately decide the constitution of the Society. Meanwhile they
guarantee the general soundness of the books and publications which
will be advertised on their pages; but under no circumstances do they
make the Society responsible for all the opinions of its contributors;
they desire full discussion of all questions.


5. MEMBERSHIP.

The Committee invite the membership of all those who are genuinely
interested in the objects of the Society and willing to assist in its
work. They should send application for membership to the Honorary
Secretary, Mr. L. Pearsall Smith, 11 St. Leonards Terrace, London,
S.W.3.


6. ORIGINAL PROSPECTUS.

The following is a reprint of the original prospectus as issued Oct.
1913:--

Literary education in England would seem in one grave respect to lack
efficiency, for it does not inspire writers with a due sense of
responsibility towards their native speech. In most European countries
men of letters, and the better class of journalists, are trained to
observe the changes of the language, and to assist consciously in its
development, being guided by acknowledged principles of tradition and
taste. But the English language, which is now rapidly spreading over
the world, is subject to no such guidance, and to very little
intelligent criticism. There is indeed occasional discussion, both in
the journals and in table-talk, concerning the choice and use of
special words and the standards of style; but this is mostly conducted
by irresponsible persons, who have no knowledge of the history of
English, and are even without any definite ideal or right conception
of what the essentials of a good language must be.

It is therefore proposed that a few men of letters, supported by the
scientific alliance of the best linguistic authorities, should form a
group or free association, and agree upon a modest and practical
scheme for informing popular taste on sound principles, for guiding
educational authorities, and for introducing into practice certain
slight modifications and advantageous changes.

The promoters of this association (which calls itself the 'Society for
Pure English') are of course well aware of the danger of affectation,
which constitutes the chief objection to any conscious reform of
language. They are fully on their guard against this; and they think
that the scheme of activity which they propose must prevent their
being suspected of foolish interference with living developments.

The ideal of their proposed association is both conservative and
democratic. It would aim at preserving all the richness of
differentiation in our vocabulary, its nice grammatical usages, its
traditional idioms, and the music of its inherited pronunciation: it
would oppose whatever is slipshod and careless, and all blurring of
hard-won distinctions, but it would no less oppose the tyranny of
schoolmasters and grammarians, both in their pedantic conservatism,
and in their ignorant enforcing of newfangled 'rules', based not on
principle, but merely on what has come to be considered 'correct'
usage. The ideal of the Society is that our language in its future
development should be controlled by the forces and processes which
have formed it in the past; that it should keep its English character,
and that the new elements added to it should be in harmony with the
old; for by this means our growing knowledge would be more widely
spread, and the whole nation brought into closer touch with the
national medium of expression.

The Society, therefore, will place itself in opposition to certain
tendencies of modern taste; which taste it hopes gradually to modify
and improve. Its object will be best exhibited by stating a few
definite proposals which may be regarded as typical.

I. Literary taste at the present time, with regard to foreign words
recently borrowed from abroad, is on wrong lines, the notions which
govern it being scientifically incorrect, tending to impair the
national character of our standard speech, and to adapt it to the
habits of classical scholars. On account of these alien associations
our borrowed terms are now spelt and pronounced, not as English, but
as foreign words, instead of being assimilated, as they were in the
past, and brought into conformity with the main structure of our
speech. And as we more and more rarely assimilate our borrowings, so
even words that were once naturalized are being now one by one made
un-English, and driven out of the language back into their foreign
forms; whence it comes that a paragraph of serious English prose may
be sometimes seen as freely sprinkled with italicized French words as
a passage of Cicero is often interlarded with Greek. The mere printing
of such words in italics is an active force towards degeneration. The
Society hopes to discredit this tendency, and it will endeavour to
restore to English its old reactive energy; when a choice is possible
we should wish to give an English pronunciation and spelling to useful
foreign words, and we would attempt to restore to a good many words
the old English forms which they once had, but which are now
supplanted by the original foreign forms.

Other foreign denizens which are claiming naturalization we would
encourage on the principle of preferring their more English forms. It
would plainly be useful for writers to be acquainted with such
matters; and a list of all such words with their English history would
be a good example of the sort of academic service which this Society
might render.

II. The large and necessary importation of foreign words into the
English language has undoubtedly weakened its ancient word-making
powers; and while all fantastic and awkward inventions and
ill-sounding compounds should be avoided, it seems desirable to give
at least a fair chance to words formed out of English material. Such
new English words, especially new English compounds, need, it would
seem, to be used for some little time before we can overcome our
dislike of them, while terms of Greek and Latin origin, however
cumbrous and unsuitable they may be, are accepted almost without
question. We would discourage such unimaginative and artificial
formations, and on principle prefer terms made of English material,
which are easily understood and naturally spoken by English-speaking
people.

III. Until recent years English writers were in the habit of
experimenting somewhat freely in language, and to their word-coining
activity we owe many of our current and most useful terms. But since
Carlyle there have been until lately few experiments of this kind.
Many words are added every year to the English vocabulary, but they
are for the most part the deliberate creations of scientific writers;
while the very men who should concern themselves with this matter
stand aloof, and leave it to those who by nature and profession are
least sensitive to the aesthetic requirements. We would therefore
encourage those who possess the word-making faculty to exercise it
freely; and we hope in the future that suggestions from our members
may help men of science and inventors in their search for new and
appropriate names.

IV. Although men of letters may occasionally add to the resources of
the language by word-coinage, their main activity is and must be one
of selection. They are forced, for the most part, to choose their
vocabulary from the supplies at hand, and by their choice they do much
to give prevalence to the words which meet with their approval. Now,
believing that language is or should be democratic both in character
and origin, and that its best word-makers are the uneducated, and not
the educated classes, we would prefer vivid popular terms to the
artificial creations of scientists. We shall often do better by
inquiring, for instance, not what name the inventor gave to his new
machine, but what it is called by the workmen who handle it; and in
adopting their homespun terms and giving them literary currency, we
shall help to preserve the living and popular character of our speech.

V. The present spread of education, and the enforcement of a uniform
and town-bred standard of speech throughout the schools of the
country, is destroying dialects and local forms with great rapidity.
These have been studied by specialists, and their value is fully
recognized; but the attitude of the educated classes towards them is
still contemptuous or indifferent. This ignorant contempt is to be
regretted for many reasons. Not only is some knowledge of dialects
needful for any true understanding of the history and character of our
language, but the standard speech has in the past derived much
enrichment and what is called 'regeneration' from the picturesque
vocabularies of local vernaculars. The drying-up of these sources
cannot but be regarded as a misfortune. We shall therefore actively
encourage educated people, and, above all, teachers in country
schools, to take a more sympathetic interest in the forms and usages
of local speech. The Scotch Education Board has recently ordered that
dialect should not be unduly discouraged in Scottish schools, and
advised that children should be allowed some use of their natural
speech in class. We hope that this example may be followed all over
the country. We also believe that a knowledge of provincial
pronunciation, and a familiarity with the richness and beauty of the
vowel sounds which it often preserves, especially in the North, would
be of value to those who speak the standard language, and would
certainly lead to some correction of the slurred and indistinct way of
speaking which is now regarded as correct English, and deliberately
taught as such on the Continent.

VI. As to idiomatic pronunciation involving speech-rhythm. The
literary taste of the eighteenth century, as typified in Dr. Johnson,
consciously discredited idioms which it held to be ungrammatical; and
this error persists. A simple instance is the growing loss of our
enclitics. The negative _not_ was enclitic after the verb, and this
gave us our _shan't_, _don't_, _won't,_ &c. Dr. Johnson held the _not_
to be too important a qualification to leave unaccented. Again, where
prepositions made a pronoun enclitic, the old accent is perishing.
_For it_, which used to be pronounced _forrit_ as one word, is now
generally spoken _faw it_, as two. The result of such conscious
pedantries is not only a great damage to the rhythmic beauty of our
older literature, actually teaching the folk to misread the admirable
prose of our Bible, but it is a bungling interference with the natural
evolution of our sentences, as we mould them to our convenience. We
would trust the general ear in such questions of syllabic rhythm, and
would protect as far as possible the old harmonious cadences of our
traditional speech.

We have no present intention of engaging in the vexed question of the
illogical and often absurd orthography of English. Members of the
Society would perhaps desire some relaxation of these bonds, but we
think it better to concentrate on other profounder modifications of
the language which, though of first importance, are receiving no
special attention. We are aware that proposals for violent change
often defeat their own end, and make all reform impossible. We shall
therefore not insist on any doubtful or disputable detail as a rule of
correctness; but we shall rely on suggestion, believing that we shall
attain the best results by causing those who lead the fashion to
consider the problems and think them out for themselves. We are
convinced that by this means an ideal of self-harmonized speech will
be gradually approved, and will spontaneously create a better standard
of national taste, to which the future developments of the language
may be safely entrusted.

These proposals will be distributed and privately circulated from hand
to hand. Sympathizers, especially writers and teachers, who find
themselves in agreement with the main principles of the Society, and
are willing, as far as convenience and current usage allow, to promote
its aims by their example, can, for the present at least, join it by
invitation from one of its members.

There will be no money subscription to this Society. A list of
members, with their addresses, will be printed under the Society's
initials; and this will be from time to time posted to all members,
who may also obtain copies of the proposals to show to friends.

With so little machinery, it may be inquired how it is expected to
accomplish anything. The idea is that all members will be guided by
the principles of the Society, and committed by their membership to
_active_ promotion of its objects, one of which will be enrolment of
recruits. Many of our members will be in a position to influence
public opinion directly and daily. The fact that there will be a body
of united opinion seems to us all that is needed: it is only required
to marshal the forces.

Should the Society find sufficient support, it would be proposed that
a small journal or occasional fly-leaves should be printed, in which
questions of literary usage could be discussed in detail. The printing
and distribution of useful papers by members able to help in this way
could be easily arranged for by a small committee, which would be
formed for dealing with this and other activities of the Society.


7. ORIGINAL COMMITTEE.

HENRY BRADLEY

ROBERT BRIDGES

SIR WALTER RALEIGH

L. PEARSALL SMITH


8. REPRINT OF LIST OF MEMBERS, 1914.

(* deceased)

Rev. E.A. ABBOTT, D.D., &c.

LASCELLES ABERCROMBIE

W.A. AIKIN

J.G. ANDERSON, Editor, Modern Language Teaching

S.O. ANDREW, Head Master, Whitgift Grammar School, Croydon

*Rt. Hon. Sir WILLIAM R. ANSON, Bt., D.C.L., M.P., Warden, All Souls
College, Oxford

Rt. Hon. A. J. BALFOUR, LL.D., F.R.S., M.P., &c.

*Very Rev. H. C. BEECHING, D.D., Dean of Norwich

BERNHARD BERENSON

GORDON BOTTOMLEY

A.C. BRADLEY, LL.D., F.B.A.,

HENRY BRADLEY, F.B.A., Ph.D., Joint Editor, Oxford English Dictionary,
&c.

CLOUDESLEY BRERETON

ROBERT BRIDGES, F.R.C.P., LL.D., &c., Poet Laureate

H.H. BRINDLEY, M.A.

JAMES BRITTEN, K.S.G.

GILBERT CANNAN

T. COBDEN-SANDERSON

W.A. CRAIGIE, LL.D., &c., Joint Editor, Oxford English Dictionary

WALTER DE LA MARE

G. LOWES DICKINSON

JAMES MAIN DIXON, L.H.D.

HENRY AUSTIN DOBSON, LL.D., &c.

HUGH E. EGERTON, Beit Professor of Colonial History, Oxford

J. FITZMAURICE-KELLY, F.B.A., Litt.D., &c.

*JAMES ELROY FLECKER

W. WARDE FOWLER, D.Litt., &c.

Rt. Hon. Sir EDWARD FRY, G.C.B., F.R.S., &c.

ROGER FRY

WILFRED WILSON GIBSON

LADY GLENCONNER

EDMUND GOSSE, C.B., LL.D., &c.

Rev. CECIL GRANT, Head Master, St. George's School, Harpenden

H.J.C. GRIERSON, Professor of English Literature, Aberdeen

W.H. HADOW, D.Mus., Principal, Armstrong College, Newcastle

THOMAS HARDY, LL.D., O.M.

Miss JANE HARRISON, LL.D., &c.

*HORACE HART, Hon. M.A., Controller of the University Press, Oxford

MAURICE HEWLETT

F.J.H. JENKINSON, Litt.D., Librarian, Cambridge University

W.P. KER, F.B.A., Professor of English Literature, University College,
London

W.M. LINDSAY, F.B.A., LL.D., &c., Professor of Humanity, St. Andrews

R.W. MACAN, D.Litt., &c., Master of University College, Oxford

DESMOND MACCARTHY

J.W. MACKAIL, LL.D., &c.

FREDERICK MANNING

E. MARSH, C.M.G.

ALAN MOORE, M.B.

NORMAN MOORE, F.R.C.P.

*F.W. MOORMAN, Ph.D., Professor of English Language and Literature,
Leeds

WALTER MORRISON

GILBERT MURRAY, D.Litt., LL.D., F.B.A., Regius Professor of Greek,
Oxford

*Sir JAMES A. H. MURRAY, D.C.L., &c., Editor, Oxford English
Dictionary

HENRY NEWBOLT

Rev. A. SMYTHE PALMER, D.D.

Rt. Hon. Sir FREDERICK POLLOCK, Bt., D.C.L., &c.

Miss ETHEL PORTAL

Sir ARTHUR QUILLER-COUCH, Litt.D., &c., Professor of English
Literature, Cambridge

Sir WALTER RALEIGH, Professor of English Literature, Oxford

Rev. G. H. RENDALL, Litt.D.

BRUCE L. RICHMOND

FRANK ROSCOE

Sir RONALD ROSS, K.C.B., F.R.S.

W.H.D. ROUSE, Litt.D., &c., Head Master, Perse Grammar School,
Cambridge

GEORGE SAINTSBURY, LL.D., &c., Professor of Rhetoric and English
Literature, Edinburgh University

E.B. SARGANT

JOHN SARGEAUNT

*Miss EDITH SICHEL

J.A. SMITH, Waynflete Professor of Moral and Metaphysical Philosophy,
Oxford

G.C. MOORE SMITH, Litt,D., Professor of English Language and
Literature, Sheffield

L. PEARSALL SMITH

J.A. SPENDER, Editor, Westminster Gazette

CHRISTOPHER STONE

LADY STRACHEY

*R.J.E. TIDDY, University Lecturer in English, Oxford

R.C. TREVELYAN

Rev. A. W. UPCOTT, D.D., Head Master, Christ's Hospital

HUGH WALPOLE

Mrs. HUMPHRY WARD

T. HERBERT WARREN, D.C.L., LL.D., &c., President of Magdalen College,
Professor of Poetry, Oxford

Mrs. WHARTON

H.C.K. WYLD, B.Litt., Professor of English Language and Philology,
Liverpool University

ISRAEL ZANGWILL


9. ADDITIONAL MEMBERS.

Hon. MAURICE BARING

ARNOLD BENNETT

Prince ANTOINE BIBESCO

R.W. CHAPMAN

HAROLD COX

A. CLUTTON-BROCK

W.M. DIXON, Professor of English Literature, Glasgow

OLIVER ELTON, Professor of English Literature, Liverpool

E.M. FOSTER

F.G. FOWLER

H.W. FOWLER

G.S. GORDON, Professor of English Literature, Leeds

Miss MAUD HAVILAND, Newnham College

C.H. HERFORD, Litt.D., Professor of English Literature, Manchester

PERCY LUBBOCK

GEOFFREY MADAN

P.E. MATHESON

H.S. MILFORD

J.C. SQUIRE

Rev. H.F. STEWART, B.D.

Miss C.L. THOMSON

Mrs. M.L. WOODS

J. WRIGHT, D.C.L., F.B.A., Professor of Comparative Philology, Oxford

Mrs. JOSEPH WRIGHT





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Society for Pure English Tract 1 (Oct
1919), by Society for Pure English

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOCIETY FOR PURE ENGLISH ***

***** This file should be named 12358.txt or 12358.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/2/3/5/12358/

Produced by David Starner, Project Manager; Keith M. Eckrich,
Post-Proofer; the Online Distributed Proofreaders Team


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


