The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Cyder-Maker's Instructor, Sweet-Maker's
Assistant, and Victualler's and Housekeeper's Director, by Thomas Chapman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Cyder-Maker's Instructor, Sweet-Maker's Assistant, and Victualler's and Housekeeper's Director
       In Three Parts

Author: Thomas Chapman

Release Date: March 18, 2005 [EBook #15407]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CYDER-MAKER'S ***




Produced by S.R.Ellison, Robert Cicconetti, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.






                 THE

       CYDER-MAKER'S INSTRUCTOR,

        Sweet-Maker's Assistant,

  And Victualler's and Housekeeper's

              DIRECTOR.

           IN THREE PARTS.

       *       *       *       *       *

PART I.

Directs the grower to make his cyder in the manner foreign wines are
made; to preserve its body and flavour; to lay on a colour, and to
cure all its disorders, whether bad flavour'd, prick'd, oily, or ropy.

PART II.

Instructs the trader or housekeeper to make raisin-wines, at a small
Expence, little (if any thing) inferior to foreign wines in strength
or flavour; to cure their disorders; to lay on them new bodies,
colour, &c.

PART III.

Directs the brewer to fine his beer and ale in a short time, and to
cure them if prick'd or ropy.

To which is added, A Method to make yest to ferment beer, as well as
common yest, when that is not to be had.

All actually deduced from the AUTHOR'S experience.

By THOMAS CHAPMAN, _Wine-Cooper_.

LONDON, Printed: BOSTON, Re-printed and Sold by GREEN & RUSSELL, in
Queen-Street, MDCCLXII.

[Price One Shilling.]




THE PREFACE.


It may be thought necessary, in compliance with custom, that I should
say something by way of PREFACE. If the reader would be informed what
my reasons were for appearing in print, I shall candidly acknowledge,
that the great prospect of a considerable advantage to myself was
indeed the strongest persuasive; but I can with equal truth affirm,
that it affords me no small pleasure to think I am doing my country at
the same time a very great piece of service; and doubt not but that,
as many will soon experience it, my labour will be thankfully received
and acknowledged.

Discoveries and Improvements ought not to be concealed; the public
good calls loudly for them; but then, in return for the great
advantage the public receives from them, the author of any such
discovery may with the greatest justice claim an adequate reward.




PREFACE


The following Receipts and Directions are not collected from books,
nor interspersed with old women's nostrums; but they are, in very
truth, the result of my own LONG EXPERIENCE in trade, founded on
chemical principles, which are principles of never-erring nature.

Perhaps I had never thought of this Method of communicating my little
knowledge, had it not been for many gentlemen in the counties of
_Gloucester, Hereford, Worcester_, &c. for whom I have done a great
deal of business, in the cyder-way particularly; and who have often
express'd their desire of seeing my directions for the management of
cyders, &c. made public.

And no doubt such a thing was wanting; for it's hardly credible how
much liquors of almost every kind is spoiled by mismanagement. Few
people know the nature of fermentation, without which no vinous spirit
can be produced; nor any liquor be rendered fine and potible.

Fermentation separates the particles of bodies, and from liquids
throws off the gross parts from the finer, which, without it, could
not be effected. There is what is called a _fret_, which is only a
partial fermentation, that nature is strong enough in some liquors to
bring on, without the assistance of art; but this _fret_, or partial
fermentation, is never strong enough to discharge the liquor of its
foul parts; and if they should ever happen to subside, the least
alteration in weather, as well as a hundred other accidents, will
occasion their commixing, and render the liquor almost, or altogether
as foul as ever; to prevent which we call in the assistance of art,
and which our method will effectually prevent.

In brewing beer, yest is apply'd to it, in order to ferment it,
without which it would never be beer. This opens the body of the
liquor, and renders it spirity and fine.

The reason that cyder is not often fine, is owing to its not being
fermented. After it is got into the hogshead, the generality of people
think they have acquitted themselves very well, and done all the
necessary business, except racking it. But I can assure them, the more
any liquor is rack'd, the more it is weaken'd. By often racking, it
loseth its body, and so becomes acid for want of strength to support
it.

Another gross error many people are guilty of, in keeping the bungs
out of the casks. Nothing is more pernicious to fermented liquors,
than their being exposed to the open air, whereby they lose their
strength and flavour. Take a bottle of wine, draw the cork, and let it
stand exposed to the open air for twenty-four hours only, and you will
then find it dead, flat, and insipid; for the spirit is volatile,
and has been carried off by the air, and what remains is the gross,
elementary part chiefly. A cyder-cask should never be kept open more
than fourteen or fifteen days, that is, 'till the ferment is stopt;
but so contrary is the practice, that I have known them very commonly
kept open three or four months. It hath been objected to me by cyder
and sweet-makers, that stopping up the cask so soon will endanger
the head being blown out or bursted; but their fears are groundless,
provided the ferment is stopt. The bottoms are quite confined, and
it is impossible they should rise, unless a forcing be added to raise
them.

The best time for bottling your cyder, is in the winter, or cool
weather, when it is _down_, otherwise you will hazard breaking most
of the bottles. The best method of keeping it, is to put it up in dry
saw-dust, which will keep it in a due temperature of heat, without the
colour's subsiding, unless you have laid a high colour on it, which,
by long keeping, will subside in the same manner port-wine doth in
bottles. For 'tis impossible to set a colour on cyder so strong, as
to have it stand the bottle more than twelve or eighteen months, at
farthest. The natural colour will change but little in a much longer
time.

What I have said of the sweet-making-business, (which I have been
constantly concerned in for more than twenty years) is principally
relating to fermentation; for it is in all kinds of made-wines the
chief thing to be observed. I shall just take notice here of one or
two things, by way of caution.

If your fruit be candied, the best way to clean them is by bagging,
and then you may easily take the stems from them.

It is very seldom that the fruit is all of the same goodness, I would
therefore recommend, that the best fruit be made separate from the
ordinary, it being easy, and much more prudent, to mix the liquors to
your palate, than to run the hazard of making the good fruit with the
bad, a small quantity of which will sometimes spoil the flavour of the
liquor, and turn it acid.

As to the method of brewing malt-liquors, I shall only here observe,
that the practice of boiling the wort so long as is often done, is
very injudicious. Five minutes is long enough: a longer time serves
only to evaporate the spirit, without having any good effect.

Under the head of malt-liquor, I have confined myself to giving proper
instructions for curing their disorders, such as fining 'em, _&c._
which must be of great use to victuallers as well as private families,
who, by reason of the badness of malt, mismanagement, bad weather, or
other accidents, have frequently quantities by them, which for want of
knowing how to cure, lie useless, and are sometimes thrown away.

In the course of these receipts, I have endeavoured to lay down every
thing as plain as possible, preferring, in these cases, plainness
to elegance, even tho' I were capable of it, which indeed I have no
pretensions to.

Before I take leave of my reader, I must admonish him, that if my
directions are not observed punctually, I will not be answerable for
his success; for he may be assured, in matters of this kind, a
great deal depends upon what many people think trifling, and of no
consequence whether done or not. But on the other hand, if he will
take care to observe them exactly, I am sure they will fully answer
his expectations. So shall he not repent laying out his money on this
_little_, but not the least _valuable_, book; nor will my reputation
suffer in having penn'd it for his use; which is the earnest wish of

  His humble Servant,

  T.C.




The _Cyder-Maker's_ Instructor.


Let your fruit be as near the same ripeness as possible, otherwise the
juice will not agree in fermenting. When they are properly sweated,
grind and press them; and as soon as you have filled a cask, if a
hogshead, which is one hundred and ten gallons, ferment it as follows;
and if less, proportion the ingredients to your quantity.


A FERMENT for CYDER.

To one hogshead of cyder, take three pints of solid yest, the mildest
you can get; if rough, wash it in warm water, and let it stand 'till
it is cold. Pour the water from it, and put it in a pail or can;
put to it as much jalap as will lay on a six-pence, beat them well
together with a whisk, then apply some of the cyder to it by degrees
'till your can is full. Put it all to the cyder, and stir it well
together. When the ferment comes on, you must clean the bung-holes
every morning with your finger, and keep filling the vessel up. The
ferment for the first five or six days will be black and stiff; let it
stand till it ferments white and kind, which it will do in fourteen or
fifteen days; at that time stop the ferment, otherwise it will impair
its strength.


To stop the FERMENT.

In stopping this ferment, which is a very strong one, you must first
rack it into a clean cask, and when pretty near full, put to it three
pounds of course, red, scowering sand, and stir it well together with
a strong stick, and fill it within a gallon of being full; let it
stand five or six hours, then pour on it as softly as you can a gallon
of English spirit, and bung it up close; but leave out the vent-peg
a day or two. At that time just put it in the hole and close it by
degrees till you have got it close. Let it lay in that state at least
a year, and if very strong cyder, such as stire, the longer you keep
it the better it will be in the body; and when you pierce it, if not
bright, force it in the following manner.


A FORCING for CYDER.

Take a gallon of perry or stale beer, put to it one ounce of
isinglass, beat well and cut or pull'd to small pieces; put it to the
perry or beer, and let it steep three or four days. Keep whisking
it together, or else the glass will stick to the bottom, and have no
effect on the liquor. When it comes to a stiff jelly, beat it well in
your can with a whisk, and mix some of the cyder with it, 'till you
have made the gallon four; then put two pounds of brick rubbings to
it, and stir it together with two gallons of cyder more added to it,
and apply to the hogshead; stir it well with your paddle, and shive
it up close. The next day give it vent, and you will find it fine and
bright. If you force perry, cut your isinglass with cyder or stale
beer, for no liquor will force its own body.


To cure ACID CYDER.

It is always to be observ'd, that even weak _alkali_'s cure the
strongest acid, such, for instance, as calcin'd chalk, calcin'd
oyster or scallop-shells, calcin'd egg-shells, alabaster, &c. But if
a hogshead can soon be drank, use a stronger _alkali_, such as salt of
tartar, salt of wormwood; but in using them, you must always preserve
their colour with _lac_, or else the _alkali_ will turn the liquor
black, and keep it foul.

To one hogshead, take two gallons of _lac_, and put to it one ounce
and a half of isinglass beat well and pulled small; boil them together
for five or six minutes; drain it, and when a stiff jelly, break it
with a whisk, and mix about a gallon of the cyder with it; then
put three pounds of calcin'd chalk, and two pounds of calcined
oyster-shells to it, whisk it well together with four gallons more
of the cyder, and apply it to the hogshead. Stir it well, and it will
immediately discharge the acid part out at the bung. Let it stand one
hour, then bung it close for five or six days; rack it from the bottom
into a clean hogshead, and apply one quart of forcing to it. If you
use a strong _alkali_, put to the _lac_ four ounces of salt of tartar,
or salt of wormwood; but the former is best, as it hath not the bitter
taste in it which the wormwood has.

_Note_, Lac _is milk, but the cream must be skimm'd off it for use_.


To cure OILY CYDER.

The reason that cyder is sometimes oily, is owing to the fruit not
being sorted alike; for the juice of fruit that is not ripe will
seldom mix with ripe juice in fermentation. The acid part of one will
predominate over the other, and throw the oily particles from it,
which separation gives the liquor a disagreeable, foul taste; to
remedy which you must treat it in the following manner, which will
cause the oily parts to swim at top, and then you may rack the liquor
from its bottom and oil.

To a hogshead, take an ounce of salt of tartar, and two ounces of half
sweet spirit of nitre, mix them in a gallon of _lac_, and whisk them
well together; apply it to the hogshead, bung it up, and let it stand
ten or fifteen days; then put a cock within two inches of the bottom
of the hogshead, and rack it.

Observe when it runs low, to look to the cock, lest any of the oily
part should come, which will be all on the top, and will not run out
till after the good liquor is drawn off.

Put to the clean a quart of forcing, to raise it, and bung it close.

_Note_, When you take out the oil and bottom, your cask must be well
fired, otherwise it will spoil all the liquor that shall be afterwards
put into it.


For ROPY CYDER.

The following remedy for ropy cyder must be proportion'd with judgment
to the degree of the disorder in the liquor. If the rope be stiff and
stringy, you must use a larger quantity of the ingredients.

If a hogshead be quite stiff and stringy, work it at least an hour
with your paddle, then put to it six pounds of common allum, ground to
a fine powder; work it for half an hour after, and bung it up close.
This in a week will cut the rope and bring it to a fine, thin, fluid
state. Then rack it into a clean hogshead, and put to it one quart of
forcing; stir them well in the hogshead and bung it close up. If but a
thin rope, use a less quantity of the allum, and work it the same way.


CYDERS bad flavour'd.

Some cyders in keeping are apt to get reasty, thro' the ill quality of
the fruit; and sometimes thro' the badness of the cask will get musty,
or fusty.

To remedy these evils, you must throw it in ferment, if its body is
strong, with yest and jalap, and let it ferment three or four days;
which will throw off the greatest part of the taste; then stop the
ferment. If a hogshead, put to it one pound of sweet spirit of nitre,
and bung it up close. This will cure the bad flavour if any left, and
likewise keep it from growing flat.


To colour CYDER.

In many places, particularly where the soil is light, and the orchard
lays rising, the juice of the fruit is nearly white, and tho' the
cyder may be strong, it doth not appear to be so, by reason of its
colour, which always prejudices the buyer against it.

Many people spoil a great deal of good cyder by boiling and mixing
melasses with it, to give it a colour; which not only gives it a bad
red colour, but makes it muddy, as well as bad tasted. Others, again,
will boil a large quantity of brown sugar and mix with it, which gives
it a colour indeed, tho' a light one; when two pounds of good sugar,
properly used, is sufficient to colour ten hogsheads, as follows:

Take two pounds of powder sugar, the whiter the sugar the farther it
will go, and the better the colour will be. Put it in an iron pot or
ladle; set it over the fire, and let it burn 'till it is black and
bitter; then put two quarts of boiling hot water to it; keep stirring
it about, and boil it a quarter of an hour after you have put the
water to it. Take it off the fire, and let it stand 'till it is cold;
then bottle it for use.

Half a pint of this will colour a hogshead. Put to each half pint,
when you use it, a quarter of an ounce of allum ground, to set the
colour.




PART II.

The _Sweet-Maker's_ Assistant.


Of RAISIN WINES.


These wines are made of various kinds of fruit; of _Malaga's,
Belvederes, Smyrna's, Raisins of the Sun_, &c. But the fruit that
produces the best wines is black _Smyrna's_, their juice being the
strongest, and the fruit clearest from stalks: for the stalks in
_Malaga's_ and _Belvideres_ are apt to give the wine a bad flavour,
and will always throw an acid on it; for the stalks of all fruits are
acid; but the stalks of _Smyrna's_ are so trifling, that after rubbing
the fruit between your hands, they will easily sift out. Wine made
from this fruit is the colour of Madeira, and has very much the
flavour of it. Malaga is the colour and flavour of foreign malaga, but
nothing near so strong. Wine made from belvideres is strong and very
sweet; and after keeping it four or five years is very little inferior
to old mountain.

In order to succeed in making these wines, you ought never to set your
steeps in hot weather, because the heat will put the fruit in a fret
which will injure its fermenting kindly. The best time for making is
in January or February. Set your steeps in the coldest part of the
cellar, still remembering to keep them from the frost.

To every gallon of water put five pounds of fruit, if good; if but
indifferent, put six pounds, into the steep. Keep stirring them three
or four times a day, and let them continue in the steep till the fruit
begins to burst, and the stones swim on the top; which will be in
about fourteen or fifteen days. Then strain the liquor from the fruit,
and press the fruit very dry, mixing the pressings with the rest of
the liquor, and put all together into a cask, and ferment it in the
following manner.

To every pipe of wine take two quarts of solid ale yest and one ounce
of jalap, put them into a can, and into them pour a gallon of the new
wine first made hot, whisk them well together, and apply to the pipe,
stirring all together very well. If your cask be less than a pipe,
proportion your yest and jalap accordingly. When the ferment comes
on, you must keep the bung-hole clean, and let the vessel be filled up
three or four times a day. Let it ferment ten or twelve days, or till
it works clean and white. Then take it off its bottom, which will be
very considerable, and put it into a clean cask. You may filter the
bottom thro' a linen rag and put to the wine. Lay some heavy weight
over the bung, and let it stand a day. Then lay on the top of the wine
five gallons of melasses-spirit, and bung it up close. Leave out
the vent peg a day or two; then drop it in the hole, and close it by
degrees 'till you have made it quite close.

Let it lay in this state for six months, at that time rack it from its
bottom into a clean pipe, and you'll find it tolerably fine. Then put
to it one quart of _forcing_, and bung it up. Let it lay 'till within
a month of your wanting it; for the longer it lays the better it will
be in body. Then rack it for the last time (always observing you touch
no bottoms) and put three pints of _forcing_ to it. Stir it well with
your paddle, and bung it up. The bottoms you may run thro' a linen rag
as before, and mix with that in the pipe. You may pierce the wine in
six or seven days, and you will find it quite fine and bright.


To force RAISIN WINES.

For one pipe, take two quarts of good cyder; put half an ounce of
ground allum to it, and one ounce of isinglass pulled to small pieces.
Beat them well in your can three or four times a day, and let the
mixture stand till it becomes a stiff jelly; then break it with your
whisk, and add to it two pounds of white sand or stone dust. Then
break it up gradually with some of the wine, 'till you have made the
two quarts two gallons, stir it well together, and apply to the pipe,
and bung up close.

The sand will carry down with it all the small particles with the
isinglass misses, and likewise confine the bottom so as to prevent it
from rising. But if you make your wine stronger by allowing a larger
quantity of fruit to the gallon, this _forcing_ will not do; for all
_forcings_ must be stronger than the body forc'd, or else the foul
parts will not fall; therefore such wines must be forced with _English
stum_, a quart of which is sufficient for a pipe, one pound of
alabaster being beat in with it and apply'd as above.


ENGLISH STUM.

Take a five gallon cask that has been well soaked in water, set it to
drain; then take a pound of roll brimstone and melt in a ladle; put as
many rags to it as will suck up the melted brimstone. Burn half those
rags in the cask, covering the bung-hole so much as that it may have
just air enough to keep it burning. When burnt out put three gallons
of very strong cyder, and one ounce of common allum (pounded and mixt
with the cyder) into the cask. Keep rolling the cask about five or
six times a day for two days. Then take out the bung, and hang the
remainder of the rags on a wire in the cask, as near the cyder as
possible, and set them on fire as before. When burnt out, bung the
cask close and roll it well about three or four times a day for two
days; then let it stand seven or eight days, and this liquor will be
so strong as to affect your eyes by looking at it.

When you force a pipe, take one quart of this liquid, put half an
ounce of isinglass to it beat and pulled to small pieces. Whisk it
together, and it will dissolve in four or five hours. Break the jelly
with your whisk, and put one pound of alabaster to it, then dilute it
with some of the wine, put it in the pipe, bung it close, and in a day
it will be fine and bright.


To cure ACID RAISIN WINES.

The following ingredients must be proportioned to the degree of
acidity; if but small, you must use the less, if a stronger acid a
larger quantity. It must likewise be proportioned to the quantity of
wine as well as to the degree of acidity.

Observe that your cask be nearly full before you apply the
ingredients; which will have this good effect, the acid part of the
wine will rise to the top immediately, and issue out at the bung-hole.
But if the cask be not full, the part that should fly off will still
continue in the cask, and weaken the body of the wine. If your cask be
full, it will be fit to have a body laid on it, in three or four days
time.

I shall here proportion the ingredients for a pipe, supposing it quite
acid, so as but just recoverable.

Take two gallons of lac, and two ounces of isinglass, boil them a
quarter of an hour; strain the liquor, and let it stand 'till it
is cold; then break it well with your whisk, and put four pounds of
alabaster and three pounds of whiting to it. Stir them well together,
and add one ounce of salt of tartar to the whole. Mix by degrees some
of the wine with it, so as to dilute it to a thin liquor. Apply this
to the cask, and stir it well with your paddle. This will immediately
discharge the acid part from it, as was said before.

When it is off and quite down, bung it up for three days, then
rack it, and you'll find part of its body gone off by the strong
fermentation. To remedy this, you must lay a fresh body on it in
proportion to the degree to which it hath been lower'd by the above
process; always having special care not to alter flavour. And this
must be done with clarified sugar; for no fluid body will agree with
it but what will make it thinner, or confer its own taste; therefore
the following is the best manner.


To lay a fresh body on the WINES.

Take three quarters of a hundred of brown sugar, and put into your
copper, then put a gallon of lime water to it, to keep it from
burning. Keep stirring it about 'till it boils; then take three eggs
and mash all together with the Shells, which put to the sugar. Stir
it about, and as the scum or filth arise take it off. When quite clean
put it into your can, and let it stand 'till it is cold before you use
it. Then break it with the whisk by degrees, with about ten gallons of
the wine, and apply it to the pipe. Work it with your paddle for half
an hour; then put one quart of _stum forcing_ to it, which will unite
their bodies, and likewise make it fine and bright. You must keep it
bung'd very close.


To cure RAISIN WINES that are cloudy.

These wines, if they take a chill, are affected in the same manner
with Port-wines. Like them they will be cloudy, and will have a
floating lee in them, which by shaking in a glass will rise in clouds.

If any thing be apply'd to it cold, it will strike a greater chill
upon it, and change its true colour to a pale or deep blue one; to
prevent which, and take off the chill, you must,

_For a Pipe_,

Take one gallon of lac and one ounce of isinglass broke in small
pieces, three pounds of alabaster, two ounces of sweet spirit of
nitre; boil them together for five or six minutes; Stir them and apply
to the pipe as hot as possible. Stir it well in the pipe with your
paddle, and in about two hours after, bung it close up. Let it lay
five or six days, and you'll find it quite fine and bright.

This will make it a little flat, to remedy which you must rack it
clean from it's bottoms, and throw a quart of _stum forcing_ to it.


To colour RAISIN WINES.

Wine made of raisins of the sun is always of the colour of rhenish,
which is almost white. Very often that which is made of malaga's
(especially if the fruit be but indifferent) will not hold its colour,
but must have a colour laid on it.

The right colour of raisin wine is the colour of mountain. You must
take care that your wine has not a great bottom in it; for if it has,
'twill be longer before it falls fine.

In order to lay a mountain colour on your wine, you must take three or
four pounds of brown sugar, according to the quantity of wine you want
to colour. Put it in an iron pan or iron ladle, set it over the fire,
and keep stirring it about. Let it burn in this manner 'till it is
quite black and bitter, which will be in about half an hour.

If you burn one pound of sugar, put a quart of boiling hot water to
it; stir it about, and let it boil a quarter of an hour longer, then
take it off and let it cool. A pint of this mixture is sufficient to
colour a pipe of wine; but note, that with every pint you must mix a
quarter of an ounce of common allum pounded to a fine powder; which
will set the colour so that it will not subside, other wise it will
fall to the bottom, and have no good effect on the liquor.

If you would have your wine of the colour of port, you must take eight
ounces of logwood raspings, four ounces of alkanet root, one ounce of
cochineal. Infuse them over a slow fire for three hours; strain the
liquor from the wood, and keep it boiling. Then burn three pounds of
brown sugar as before, and put the colour'd liquor to it; boil all
together a quarter of an hour longer; then take it off, and when cold,
bottle it for use.

A pint of this liquor will make a pipe the colour of port wine. You
must always remember to set the colour with a quarter of an ounce of
common allum, ground or beaten to a fine powder.




PART III

THE _Housekeepers_ DIRECTOR.


FORCING for BEER.

There are two sorts of forcings for beer; for what will agree with one
kind of beer will not serve for another. Some beer when kept twelve or
fourteen months will taste as new and sweet as if not brew'd more than
six or seven, nay a much shorter time, which must have a different
forcing from that which is proper for beer that is ripe or less sweet.

Beers that are full and sweet must be forc'd in the following manner,
viz.

For a hogshead, take a gallon of stale cyder, likewise one ounce of
isinglass beat and pulled to small pieces, with an ounce of common
allum ground to a fine powder, put them to the cyder; whisk it well
together and let it stand 'till it's a jelly. Then break it in
your can, and put one ounce of cream of tartar, and two pounds of
stone-dust to it; whisk it well together, and dilute it with some of
the beer till you have made the gallon five. Apply it to the hogshead,
and stir it well about; and when the ferment is gone off (which will
be in two or three hours) bung it up close. Leave out the vent-peg;
and in a day or two you'll find it fine and bright.

Beers that are not Sweet are forced with _stum_, the same that is made
for raisin wine, with this difference only, that you must take for
one hogshead, three pints, and two pounds of alabaster; stir them well
together, and dilute with beer as above. This will carry down all the
foul particles, and make the beer fine in three or four hours.


       *       *       *       *       *

FORCING for ALE.

ALE that is brew'd in the winter to be drank in about two months
is apt to get foul, occasion'd by the brewer's neglecting it when
cooling. Sometimes it is left out in the frost, which will chill it,
and make it curdy as it were, and and foul; to remedy this you must

Take two gallons of cyder, and put two ounces of insinglass to it.
When it is a jelly, add to them two pounds of brick-rubbings; whisk
them well together, and dilute with some of the ale. Put the whole
in the hogshead, and stir all about very well. When the ferment is a
little off, bung it close; the next day give it vent, and you'll find
it fine.


ALE or BEER ACID.

If your beer or ale be a little prick'd, you must take for each
hogshead a gallon of lac, boil it with an ounce of isinglass, drain
it, and when cold, put to it two pounds of alabaster, two pounds
of calcined chalk, and one ounce of salt of tartar. Stir them well
together, and apply to the hogshead.

Mind that the cask be full, and this will immediately discharge the
acid part from it, (as in page 12.) Bung it up for three or four days
'till it is settled; then rack it into a clean hogshead, and put two
quarts of _ale forcing_ to it, and bung it close.


BEER or ALE ROPY, to cure.

If beer or ale should at any time get ropy, as in other disorders,
you must proportion the strength of your remedy to the degree of the
disorder. But beer or ale is seldom known to be so ropy as cyder.

Take, for one hogshead, two pounds of common allum in one lump, if
possible; put it into a clear fire, and burn it an hour, then pound
it, and apply to the hogshead. Stir it well for half an hour. This
will cut the rope in a day or two; then rack it and force it with the
same _stum forcing_ at is directed for beer that is not sweet, as
in page 26. If the rope be but thin, one pound of allum will be
sufficient. Hyssop will cut a thin rope in ale, but this always gives
it a bad taste.


To make YEST, to ferment new BEER.

Many people that live at a distance from any town, are at a great
loss, especially in the winter time, for yest to brew with; I shall
therefore here give them directions to make an artificial yest that
will answer the purpose altogether as well as the natural.

Take two quarts of small beer and one ounce of isinglass; boil them
together five or six minutes; put it into a can or pail, and whisk it
till it comes to the consistence of yest; let it stand an hour after,
then put it to your wort in the same manner you were used to do the
natural yest; this will be sufficient to ferment a hogshead.


THE END.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Cyder-Maker's Instructor,
Sweet-Maker's Assistant, and Victualler's and Housekeeper's Director, by Thomas Chapman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CYDER-MAKER'S ***

***** This file should be named 15407.txt or 15407.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/5/4/0/15407/

Produced by S.R.Ellison, Robert Cicconetti, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
