Project Gutenberg's Where the Sabots Clatter Again, by Katherine Shortall

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Where the Sabots Clatter Again

Author: Katherine Shortall

Release Date: July 29, 2004 [EBook #13048]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WHERE THE SABOTS CLATTER AGAIN ***




This eBook was produced by Steven desJardins and Distributed
Proofreaders.






[Illustration: Where the Sabots
Clatter Again by Katherine Shortall]

[Illustration: Katherine Shortall (autograph), December 1921]


_The Radcliffe Unit in France collaborated with the French Red Cross in
its work of reconstruction after the Armistice. It was as a member of
this unit and as chauffeuse in the devastated regions that the writer
received the impressions set forth in these sketches._



Where the Sabots Clatter Again

by Katherine Shortall


[Illustration: street scene]


Ralph Fletcher Seymour
Publisher
410 S. Michigan Avenue
Chicago


PUBLISHED FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE
RADCLIFFE COLLEGE ENDOWMENT FUND
IN AN EDITION LIMITED TO 150 COPIES

SECOND EDITION OF 150 COPIES

1921




WHERE THE SABOTS CLATTER AGAIN.



THE BRIDE OF NOYON.


A returning flush upon the plain. Streaks of color across a mangled
landscape: the gentle concealment of shell hole and trench. This is what
one saw, even in the summer of 1919. For the sap was running, and a new
invasion was occurring. Legions of tender blades pushed over the haggard
No Man's Land, while reckless poppies scattered through the ranks of
green, to be followed by the shyer starry sisters in blue and white.
Irrepressibly these floral throngs advanced over the shell torn spaces,
crowding, mingling and bending together in a rainbow riot beneath the
winds that blew them. They were the vanguard.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the midst of the reviving fields lay Noyon: Noyon, that gem of the
Oise, whose delicate outline of spires and soft tinted roofs had graced
the wide valley for centuries. Today the little city lay blanched and
shapeless between the hills, as all towns were left that stood in the
path of the armies. The cathedral alone reared its battered bulk in the
midst; a resisting pile, its two grim and blunted towers frowning into
the sky. Nobly Gothic through all the shattering, the great church rose
out of the wreckage, with flying buttresses still outspread like
brooding wings to the dead houses that had sunk about her.

But Noyon was not dead. We of the Red Cross knew that. We knew that in
cellars and nooks of this labyrinth of ruin already hundreds of hearts
were beating. On this calm September morning the newly cleared streets
resounded with the healthful music of hammer and saw, and cartwheels
rattled over the cobblestones, while workmen called to each other in
resonant voices. Pregnant sounds, these, the significance of which we
could estimate. For we had seen Noyon in the early months of the
armistice: tangled and monstrous in her attitude of falling, and silent
with the bleeding silence of desertion. Then, one memorable day, the
stillness had been broken by the first clatter of sabots--that wooden
noise, measured, unmistakable, approaching. Two pairs of sabots and a
long road. Two broad backs bent under bulging loads; an infant's wail; a
knock at the Red Cross Door--but that was nearly eight months before.

The _Poste de Secours_ was closed for the first time since Madame de
Vigny and her three young _infirmieres_ had come to Noyon. Two women
stood without, one plump and bareheaded, the other aged and bent, with a
calico handkerchief tied over her hair. They stared at the printed card
tacked upon the entrance of the large patched-up house that served as
Headquarters for the French Red Cross.

"_Tiens! c'est ferme_," exclaimed Madame Talon, shaking the rough board
door with all her meagre weight, "and I have walked eight kilometers to
get a _jupon_, and with rheumatism, too."

"Haven't you heard the news?" asked her companion with city-bred scorn.

"Ah? What news?" The crisp old face crinkled with anticipation.

"Why, Mademoiselle Gaston is to be married today."

"_Tiens, tiens! est-ce possible?_ What happiness for that good girl!"
and Madame Talon, forgetful of the loss of her _jupon_, smiled a
wrinkled smile till her nose nearly touched her chin, and her eyes
receding into well worn little puckers, became two snapping black
points.

"Is it really so? And the bridegroom--who is he?"

There followed that vivacious exchange of questions and answers and
speculations which accompanies the announcement of a marriage the world
over.

Mademoiselle Gaston was the daughter of an ancient family of Noyon. But
now, her ancestral home was a heap of debris, a tomb for men of many
nations, which she did not like to visit. She took me there once, and we
walked through the old tennis court where a little summer house remained
untouched, its jaunty frailty seeming to mock at the desolation of all
that is solid.

"Ah, I have had good times here," she said in the expressionless voice
of one who has endured too much.

For now she was alone. Tennis tournaments for her were separated from
the present by a curtain of deaths, by the incomparable space of those
four years.

Mademoiselle Gaston had played her part in it all. When the Germans were
advancing upon Noyon, she had stuck to her post and remained in the
hospital where she nursed her compatriots under enemy rule during the
first occupation of the city. Something about her had made them treat
her with respect, although I have been told that the Prussian officers
were always vaguely uncomfortable in her presence. There was, perhaps,
not enough humility in her clear eyes, and they worked her to the
breaking point. Yet so impeccable and businesslike was her conduct that
they could never convict her of any infringement of rules. Little did
these pompous invaders suspect how this slender capable girl with the
hazel eyes was spicing the hours behind their backs, and drawing with
nimble and irreverent pencil portraits of her captors, daring
caricatures which she exhibited in secret to the terrified delight of
her patients. Luckily for her this harmless vengeance had not been
discovered, for doubtless she would have paid dearly for her Gallic
audacity.

She was small of stature and very thin. Not even the nurse's flowing
garb could conceal the angularity of her figure. One wondered how so
fragile a frame could have survived the crashings and shakings of war.
What secret of yielding and resisting was hers? The tension,
nevertheless, had left its mark upon her young face; had drawn the skin
over the aquiline profile, and compressed the sensitive mouth in a line
too rigid for her years. This severity of feature she aggravated by
pinning her _coiffe_ low over a forehead as uncompromising as a nun's.
Not a relenting suggestion of hair would she permit. Yet whatever of
tenderness or hope she strove thus to hood, nothing could suppress the
beauty of her luminous eyes; caressing eyes that belied her austere
manner. No sight of blood nor weariness, no insult had hardened them.
Even when their greenish depths went dark and wide with reminiscence, a
light lurked at the bottom--the reflection of something dancing. Yes,
everybody loved Mademoiselle Gaston.

For weeks we had seen it coming. She had told us of her engagement at
breakfast one Monday morning after a week-end visit to her married
sister in Paris. It had seemed a good business proposition. She
announced it as such, calmly, with a frankness that astonished my
American soul. We were pleased. She would have a chateau and money, and
a _de_ before her name. Best of all she would have peace and
companionship after her lonely struggles. On the whole we were very much
pleased. Madame de Vigny and her gentle niece were entirely delighted.
Noyon was vociferous in its approval and congratulations. I could have
wished--but at least I did not thrust any transatlantic notions into the
general contentment.

And I soon saw--no one could fail to see--the change that day by day
came over our reserved companion. The stern line of her lips relaxed. In
amazement one day we heard her laugh. Then her laughter began to break
forth on all occasions; and we listened to her singing above in her
room, and we smiled at each other. That tightness of her brow dissolved
in a carefree radiance. At work, she mixed up her faultless card
catalogues and laughed at her mistakes. Once, during our busy hours of
distribution, we caught her blithely granting the request of fat Mere
Copillet for a cook stove and thereupon absently presenting that jovial
dame with a pair of sabots, much too small for her portly foot, to the
amusement of all the good wives gathered in the Red Cross office. They
laughed loudly in a sympathetic crowd, and Mademoiselle Gaston laughed
also, and they loved her more than ever. When they learned that she had
chosen to be married in the ruined cathedral of her native town, their
affection turned to adoration. Not a peasant in the region but took this
to be an honor to his city and to himself. Gratitude and a nameless hope
filled the hearts of the people of Noyon.

The day was at hand. The _poste_ was closed, for within there was a
feast to prepare and a bride to adorn. In the early morning the
sun-browned peasant women brought flowers, masses of goldenrod and
asters. These we arranged in brass shells, empty husks of death, till
the bleak spaciousness of our shattered house was gay. The rooms, still
elegant in proportion, lent themselves naturally to adornment; and I
found myself wondering what former festivities they had sheltered, what
other brides had passed down this stately corridor before the bombs let
in the wind and the rain and the thieves; and what remote luxuries had
been reflected in the great mirror of which only the carved gilt frame
was left? Today, goldenrod and asters bloomed against the mouldy walls
and one little tri-colored bouquet. Flowers of France, in truth, sprung
on the battle field and offered by earth-stained fingers to her who had
served.

From the kitchen came noises of snapping wood, and a sizzling which
tempted me to the door. It was a fine old kitchen, though now the tiles
were mostly gone from the floor, and the cracked walls were smeared with
uncouth paintings, the work of some childish soul--some German mess
sergeant, perhaps, who had been installed there, but today Jeanne
reigned again, bending her philosophic face over the smoking stove, and
evoking with infallible arts aromatic and genial vapors from her
casseroles. At her side, Therese, pink and cream in the abundance of her
eighteen years, fanned the fire, her eyes wide open with the novel
excitement of the occasion.

"_La guerre est finie, Mademoiselle Miss!_" cried Jeanne with spoon
dripping in mid air. "Today I have butter to cook with. Now you shall
taste a French dinner _comme il faut_!"

In the garage, Michel, all seriousness, polished the Ford that was to
carry away the bridal pair. Recently demobilized, he wore the bizarre
combination of military and civilian clothes that all over France
symbolized the transition from war to peace--black coat encroaching upon
stained blue trousers, khaki puttees, evidence of international intimacy
and--most brilliant emblem of freedom--a black and white checked cap,
put on backwards. His the ultimate responsibility at our wedding
ceremony and he looked to his tires and sparkplugs with passion.

The married sister, beautiful and charming in her Paris gown, was
superintending the _toilette_; and when all was ready, we were called
up to examine and admire. The bride was sweet and calm, smiling dreamily
at us in the foggy fragment of mirror. Below, somewhat portly and
constrained in his black coat and high collar, the bridegroom marched
with agitation back and forth in the corridor, clasping and unclasping
his hands in their gray suede gloves. The Paris train was due. Relatives
and friends began to arrive; and little nieces and nephews, all in their
best clothes. Noyon had not seen anything so gay in years. There was
bustle and business and running up and down stairs. The _poste_, usually
clamorous with the hoarse dialect of northern France, hummed and rippled
with polite conversation and courtly greetings. The bride appeared. The
bridegroom's face lost its perturbed expression in his unaffected
happiness at seeing her. Photographs were taken; she, gracious and
bending in a cloud of tulle; he, stiffly upright but smiling resolutely.
They were off in a string of carriages--sagging old carriages
resurrected from the dust--while a few of us hastened to the cathedral
by a short cut to take more pictures as they entered.

The vast nave engulfed us in its desolation. The mutilated apse seemed
to be far, far away, and one looked at it fearfully. High above through
the broken vaulting shone the indestructible blue, and through the
hollow windows the breath of Heaven wandered free. The little bride
stepped bravely between the piles of refuse, daintily gathering her
dress about her. A dirty sheet on the wall flapped without warning, and
we had a glimpse of a gaunt and pallid crucifix, instantly shrouded
again in a spasm of wind. Passing under an arch we entered a less
demolished chapel. Here all Noyon was waiting.

Thin and quavering through the expectant hush came the chords of a
harmonium. Rustlings and whisperings among the closely packed people as
the misty white figure advanced slowly into sight. At the altar the
silver-haired bishop turned his scholarly face upon her, full of
tenderness; and when he spoke, his voice seemed an assurance of peace
and purity. The service was long. In France one listens to a sermon
when one is married, and the pretty bridesmaids came round for three
collections. The bishop talked of her father, his friend, who had died
under cruel circumstances. Shoulders heaved in the congregation, and in
a dark corner a sob was stifled.

"You have suffered, my children. There has been a mighty mowing and a
winter of death, and our mother the earth has lain barren. But today
stand up, O children, and listen and feel. We are united in these ruins
by more than sorrow. What are these pulsations that beat this day upon
our soul?"

The words flowed on following the ancient grooves of sermons, but the
loving voice thrilled us. It floated through the dim atmosphere into our
consciousness, holding us as in a dream, dovelike and soothing.

My eyes trailed to the delicate bride kneeling beside a great cracked
column, and I thought of the tiny blossom again by the road, and of
those stretches without the town, no longer gray, but brushed with new
color. I saw the daisies and the grasses waving out on No Man's Land:
like heralding banners of the triumph march they waved, leading out of
sight beyond the horizon. And as the priest talked, my heart throbbed
its own silent canticle:

"Joy in the new dawned day, and in peace-awakened fields. Hope of the
flower that blooms again. Faith in the unfolding of petals, gently,
forever, and in season."

"_Soyez loue, Seigneur!_" the voice deepened and concluded.

Decisively, now, burst forth the reedlike chords of music. A wave of
movement throughout the crowd. And the bowed form trembled a moment
within its sheathing veil, against the cold stone pillar.




LITTLE GRAINS OF SAND


Shall I tell you about the old woman and her statue of Sainte Claire?
She was a true native of Picardy, and if I could give you her dialect,
this story would be more amusing. We came upon her in the course of our
visits, living in her clean little house that had been well mended. She
was delighted to have someone to talk to.

"Come in, my good girl," she patronized the queenly and aristocratic
Madame de Vigny. "Come in, everybody," and we all went in.

"Sit down, my dear," again to Madame de Vigny. "Those barbarians didn't
leave me many chairs, but here is one, and this box will do for these
young ladies." She herself remained standing, a stout old body in spite
of her eighty years. Her blue eyes were clear and twinkled with fun, and
she had a mischievous way of smiling out of the corner of her mouth,
displaying two teeth. She loved her joke, this shrewd old lady.

"_Dites, Madame_," she said, "is it true that you give away flannel
petticoats and stockings?"

"Yes, Madame, when one has need of them."

"Is it possible? And for nothing? Ah, that is good, that is generous.
Tonight I shall tell Sainte Claire about you. Would you like to see my
'_tiote[1] Sainte Claire_?" We followed her back through a little yard
and down into a cellar. "You see, Mesdames, when the villains bombarded
Noyon, I stayed right here. I wasn't going to leave my home for those
people. One night the convent opposite was struck, and the next morning
in the street I found my Sainte Claire. She wasn't harmed at all, lying
on her back in the mud. 'Now God will protect me,' I said, and I picked
her up in my arms and carried her into my house. And Sainte Claire said
to me, 'Place me down in the cave, and you will be safe.' So I brought
her down."

[Footnote 1: Dialect for _petite_.]

She led us to a tiny underground apartment, probably a vegetable cellar,
and there, on a bracket jutting from the mildewed wall, stood the
painted plaster image of the saint.

"_Voila ma Sainte Claire!_" exclaimed the old peasant woman, crossing
herself. "She and I have lived down here during the bombardment and the
entire occupation. She has protected me. Look, Madame--" and she showed
us a corner of the ceiling that had been newly repaired. "The _obus_
passed through here, and never touched us. I kept on praying to the
Sainte, and she said, 'Do not move and you will be safe.' All night I
was on my knees before her, and toward morning the house was hit--only
one meter away the wall fell down, and we were not harmed, Madame,
neither the Sainte nor I. Then Sainte Claire said to me, 'The Boches are
coming. Take half of your potatoes and bring them down here.' I had a
beautiful pile of potatoes, Madame, just harvested. But I took only half
and put them in a sack and stuffed it with hay. For thirteen months,
Madame, I slept on those potatoes. Then Sainte Claire said, 'Take half
your wine, and put it down the well.' I wanted to hide it all, but she
said 'No, take only half.' And I sunk one hundred bottles, Madame, of my
best wine in the well. The Boches came. Five of them came to my house.
Five _grands gaillards_ with square heads. Oh, they are ugly, Madame!
'Show us your wine,' they ordered. 'It is there, Messieurs, in the
cellar,' I answered meek as a lamb. And they all began drinking till
they were drunk. Then one of them dragged me down here by the arm, and
for thirteen months, Madame, I lived in this hole with Sainte Claire
while they possessed my house. They made me cook for them, the animals;
but I should have starved, Madame, if I had not had my potatoes. Then
the French began their bombardment. Ah, it was terrible, Madame, to be
bombarded by one's friends. I did not leave this cave, and I prayed and
prayed, 'Sainte Claire, save me once more!' and Sainte Claire replied,
'The French are coming. We shall not be hurt.' One morning it was
suddenly quiet: the cannon had stopped. I listened and heard nothing,
and I came up into my house. It was empty, Madame. The Boches had gone.
One shell had fallen through the roof into my bedroom--that was all. But
ah, Madame! _Noyon, pauvre Noyon!_ She was like a corpse. _Ah lala,
lala! Que'malheur!_ The next day our soldiers came. Ah, how glad I was.
And I asked Sainte Claire, 'May I not go to the well and bring up a
bottle of wine?' And she said 'No, not yet.' So we waited, Madame, until
the day of the Armistice. Then Sainte Claire said, 'Now you may go and
bring up all the wine.' And, Madame, what do you think? I went to the
well and I hauled up the wine and out of the hundred bottles only two
were broken." The old woman laughed with delight at the trick she had
played on the invader.

"They never guessed it was there. It was Sainte Claire, Madame, who
saved it. I poured her a glassful and we celebrated, Madame; we
celebrated the victory down in our cave, _ma'tiote Sainte Claire_ and
I."

       *       *       *       *       *

Mademoiselle Froissart and I left the _Poste de Secours_ one day, and
started for a far away village that was said to be utterly wiped out.
Our drive lay over a terrific road. We crossed a vast sad plain,
intersected with trenches, with nothing in sight but one monster
deserted tank, still camouflaged, and here and there the silhouette of
a blasted tree against the lowering sky. These dead trees of the battle
line! Sometimes, with their bony limbs flung forth in gnarled unnatural
gestures, they remind me of frantic skeletons suddenly petrified in
their dance of death. They are frenzied, and unutterably tragic. They
seem to move; yet they are so dead. And I imagine their denuded tortured
arms reaching toward unanswering Heaven in an agony of protest against
the fate that has gripped all nature.

We entered a torn and tangled forest. The road was narrow and overgrown,
and several times I had to dodge hand grenades that lay in the grassy
ruts. The Ford ploughed bravely through deep mud, skidded, recovered,
fell into holes, and kept on. My attention was so focused upon driving
that I saw little else but the road ahead, though once at an exclamation
from Mademoiselle Froissart, out of the corner of my eye I saw a machine
gun mounted and apparently intact. The motor was toiling, but in my soul
I blessed its regular noise that told me all was well. Leaving the wood
we came to what appeared to be a large rough clearing. There were no
trees--only bumps of earth covered with tall weeds. To our surprise we
caught sight of the jaunty blue figure of a poilu, and then a band of
slouching green-coated prisoners who were digging in their heavy
leisurely manner. Mademoiselle Froissart inquired for the village of
Evricourt.

"_Mais c'est ici, Madame_," replied the soldier with a grin.

"Here!" We stared. There was nothing by which one could have told that
this was the site of a town, except an occasional bit of brick that
showed beneath the weeds. All the Germans had stopped work to look at
these two women who had so unexpectedly penetrated to this God-forsaken
spot. We asked whether any of the inhabitants had returned.

"Just one old man," said the poilu, "who lives all alone in his cellar,
over there." He pointed, and suddenly from the ground emerged an aged
man, white haired and erect. He came toward us, an astonishingly
handsome figure. His beautifully modeled head was like a bit of perfect
sculpture found suddenly among rank ruins, whose very fineness shocks
us because of its contrast with its coarse surroundings. His blue eyes
were piercing under bushy white brows, while a snowy and curling beard,
abundant yet well trimmed, set off the dark ivory of his complexion. And
on his head, above the silvery waving hair, was placed at a careful
angle a blue _callot_. He was dressed in that agreeable soft blue that
distinguishes the garments of those who work out of doors, and a
spotless white shirt was turned back at the throat.

"_Bonjour, Mesdames_," he greeted us, taking off his cap and came up for
a chat. We were amazed at his charm and intelligence. He had come back
thus alone "because, Mademoiselle, this is my home. An old man can best
serve his country by living off his own land. What good is he in a
strange province where they eat such ridiculous things, and where
everyone has the craze for machinery? Besides, the more one's home is
ruined the greater the obligation to return and rebuild it. _C'est un
devoir, Mademoiselle._" His place was here, unless--with a twinkle in my
direction--Mademoiselle would take him back to America with her, in
which case he would willingly leave. I laughed at the compliment and
told him to name the day and the boat.

Food? He had scratched a little garden by his door and had plenty, thank
you. Clothing? "Do I not look well dressed, Mademoiselle?" We admitted
that he looked ready for a fete. Company? "Ah, Mademoiselle, memories,
memories! I smoke my pipe and I repeople this village. It is alive for
me. Look, Mademoiselle, that is where the church was--it was a pretty
church. And there was the _mairie_. Only"--with a shrug of good humored
despair--"now I have no more tobacco. These _messieurs_"--indicating the
soldier and the Germans who were smiling good naturedly--"are kind
enough to share theirs with me, but they are not very rich themselves,
you see," at which they all laughed at their common plight. Here at last
was something that we could offer. I usually kept cigarettes with me for
such emergencies. And now I produced two boxes of them and several
packages of American matches.

"Mademoiselle, I accept them with my profound thanks," said the old
_gallant_ with a bow, removing his cap.

At length we had to leave. A prisoner stepped forward to crank my car,
and all of them, the dauntless Frenchman in the center, lined up and
gave us the military salute. Before reentering the woods I looked back
and saw the blue-coated figure offering a light to the green coat. From
cigarette tip to cigarette tip the fraternal spark was being
transmitted: the spark that crosses borders and nationalities, that
glows in the darkness, and puts mankind at peace. And so we left them
all--smoking; smoking out there in the ruins, smoking and dreaming of
home. Of home and love unattainable beyond the Rhine; of home and love
buried forever in the wreckage of war and of time.

       *       *       *       *       *

This week Mademoiselle Froissart and I spent forty-eight hours in Paris,
during which time we purchased one thousand toys for our Christmas
party. Such a time as I had coralling a taxi to carry our large crate
of playthings to the station. Paris was gay and crowded, making up for
its four years of gravity, and the conscienceless taxi drivers were
having pretty much their own way, refusing all that were going in a
direction that did not suit their convenience, and extorting enormous
_pour boire_. I stood on the edge of the mad stream of vehicles that
pressed by on the boulevard, and watched for an empty taxi. One came,
the old reprobate who drove it casting his practiced eye about for a
likely looking customer. He deigned to notice me, recognizing me for an
American, and well knowing our national childish impatience, and its
lucrative consequences. He drove up to the curb.

"Where to?" he asked defiantly, blinking his bleary eyes, his red
alcoholic face set in insolent lines.

"_La Gare du Nord._"

He reflected an instant. "Bon," he decided. I got in, resolving to take
possession before breaking all the news to him.

"First I must stop at the _Grand Bazaar_ to call for a box," I said in
a most matter-of-fact way.

"Ah ca! non! It can't be done!" he exclaimed in a fury. "How do you
expect me to earn my living if I have to go out of my way and wait a
century outside a store?"

"I will pay you for your time."

Still he refused to move. "Descendez, descendez!" he cried in an ugly
voice. I knew the next one would be just as bad, and besides I had no
time to lose. The hour of the train was approaching. Basely I resorted
to bribery: "Look here, Monsieur, I am American and I will pay you well.
Did you ever know an American to fail to make it worth your while?" He
considered, and looked me over appraisingly.

"It will be twenty francs then, Madame." This was too outrageous.

"Ah non," I said in my turn, but I laughed. "_Ecoutez_, do you know what
is in that box I am going to get? Toys for the little children of the
devastated regions. If I don't take it with me they will have nothing,
nothing at all for Christmas."

"Eh, what?" His old heart was moved. "_Pays devaste? C'est vrai? Bien,
Madame_, I will take you anywhere you wish." And he started the car. On
our way through traffic he related to me over his shoulder how his wife
and children had fled from Soissons while he was driving a _camion_ at
the front, and that their home was gone.

At the _Grand Bazaar_ Mademoiselle Froissart was waiting with the huge
crate of toys. It was hoisted onto the front seat beside the chauffeur,
who, far from grumbling at its size, was most solicitous in placing it
so that it would not jar. "We mustn't break the dolls," he said with a
wink. Arriving at the station he insisted upon carrying it to the
baggage room for us. "_Hey, mon vieux!_" he addressed the baggage man,
"step lively and get that case on the train for Noyon. It's full of
dolls--dolls for the little girls." And the whole force laughed and flew
to the crate, and tenderly hustled it out to the train with paternal
interest.

"Merry Christmas and many thanks," I said to our driver, holding out the
twenty francs. He did not glance at the money and pushed back my hand.

"_Non, non, Mademoiselle, c'est un plaisir_," he murmured. I protested,
but his whole expression pleaded. "It's not much, Mademoiselle. It's for
the little girls--out there."

Passing through the gate, I looked back and saw him still standing and
watching us. He waved his hat.

"_Bon voyage!_" he called above the crowd. Then, turning, he went back
into the roaring street, doubtless to continue his business of preying
upon the intimidated and helpless public.




VAUCHELLES.


Three roads wander down from the hills and come together; and at the
point of meeting stands a crucifix. This large and dignified _Calvaire_,
though bearing the nicks of bullets and faded by weather, still sheds a
sorrowful beauty that is perhaps the more impressive because of these
marks of desecration. It forms the center of the tiny village, whose
houses cluster close to the mourning image and then straggle thinly
along the three roads. Not even the war which swept over in all its
ferocity has robbed Vauchelles of its winding charm. Many houses have
collapsed, but the village still retains its ancient outline of peaked
roofs, and on all sides orderly piles of bricks, fresh plaster and new
tar paper give an aspect of thrift and optimism. Vauchelles has met the
challenge of devastation and is setting things aright.

Is the town asleep? The healing July sun softly warms the silent houses
and their broken walls and closed doors. No one is in sight. Yet we have
come with our camionette well laden with clothing for the inhabitants.
Ah! they are all away working in the fields. Old Mademoiselle Masson,
peering through the one pane of glass that is left in her window, sees
us, and hobbles to the door to give us the information. She beams upon
us, an unkempt yet gracious figure, and when she talks her false teeth
move slightly up and down. She will run and call her sister who is up on
the hill, and she will tell Madame Riflet as she goes. The news will
spread. The news always spreads. Already the people are gathering, for
_la Croix Rouge_ is its own introduction; and these peasants, too
proud--most of them--to go and ask, will accept what is freely and
gladly given at their doors.

The first person I call upon is Madame Cat. Shall I soon forget that
determined little face with its deep set blue eyes, and sharp features
unsoftened by the brown hair that is pulled back from her forehead? Or
the one room left in that tiny house, shattered and bare, yet stamped
indelibly with the character of its valiant occupants? The ashes are
swept in the fireplace. Two burnished shells tattooed in a careful
pattern and filled with flowers brighten the mantel. And the bed! Even
though made of fragments found in the debris, with naught but a hay
_paillasse_ and a few old quilts dragged through the long flight and
return, it is nevertheless smooth and noble, adorned only with the
reverence and importance with which the French surround The Bed. The
daughter comes in, a thin music-voiced girl with a fine profile like her
mother's. They accept simply, and with appreciation, the useful things
the Red Cross offers. In this case I am authorized to make an unusual
present. For we have a few rolls of wall paper which we have been
holding for someone who takes a special pride in her interior. It would
cover the cracked and damp walls of Madame Cat and would add much cheer
to her little room, besides keeping out the wind. Their faces are
radiant at the suggestion. The daughter will come to the _poste_
tomorrow for it. Can they hang it themselves? "_Ah, c'est facile,
Mademoiselle!_" and the mother gives me her recipe for a wonderful glue
that will hold for years. They accompany me to the street.

"You will come again soon, Mademoiselle, and see it for yourself?"

I promise eagerly.

Across the street lives Monsieur Martin. He comes from his house to
greet me and holds open the gate, a tall farmer in corduroys with
gentle, genial face. His wife had died during the cruel flight from the
invader, and he and his three sons have come back to the remains of
their old home. He apologizes for it, though I find it immaculate.
Shining casseroles hang by the hearth, the three beds are carefully
made, and on the fire something savory is cooking in a _cocotte_.

"It needs a woman's touch," he says smiling. "We are four men and we do
what we can, but--" he finishes with a gesture of the helpless male
entangled in that most clinging, exasperating web of all--cooking and
dish-washing! "_Ca n'en finit plus, Mademoiselle_," he exclaims in
humorous misery. "One has no sooner finished, when one must begin again.
Bah! It is woman's work," with a lordly touch of imperiousness. It is
the ancient voice of Man.

The next house is dark. No one answers my knock, and I lift the latch
and go in. The windows, being broken, are all boarded up to keep out the
dreaded drafts. It is a moment before I can see, though a quavering
voice that is neither man's nor woman's bids me enter. Gradually my eyes
make out two wise old faces of ivory in the obscurity by the hearth.
They are old, old--nobody knows how old they are.

"_Entrez, Madame_," and the old woman rises with difficulty, leaning on
her cane, and draws forward a chair.

"_Bonjour, Madame_," in far-away tones from the aged husband, too feeble
to move alone. I linger for some time with these two dear souls--for
they are scarcely more than souls. We talk of bygone, happy days, of the
war, and of their present needs--so few! Then I tell them I am American.

"American?" says the old man, peering into my face, "that
means--friend."

"Yes," I reply, "that means--friend."

Then I come to a wooden _barraque_, a hive buzzing with children. They
are clambering at the windows and playing in the dirt before the door,
all clad in a many-colored collection of scraps which an ingenious
mother has pieced together. A little boy, wearing the blue _callot_ of a
poilu on the back of his head, sits on the doorsill. He smiles and
stands up, and tells me his mother is inside. Within I find the mother
seated in a room of good-natured disorder, nursing her latest born. Her
lavish smile of welcome lights her broad sunburned face framed in tawny
braids, and she indicates a bench for me with the ease and authority of
a long practiced hostess. She sits there with the infant at her ample
breast, and on her face is written unquestioning satisfaction with her
part in life. A swift laughing tale I hear, of little frocks outgrown
and of sabots worn through, and no place to buy anything, and little
Jean so thin and nervous, "but no wonder, Mademoiselle, for he was born
during the evacuation, and only Cecile to take care of me, and she just
sixteen years old, and I had to be carried in a wheelbarrow." I picture
the flight, the father away at the front, the mother unable to walk, yet
marshalling her little ones, comforting, cajoling, scolding, and feeding
them through it all. The baby finishes with a little contented sigh and
the proud mother exhibits him. "It's a boy, Mademoiselle," as
exuberantly as though it were her first instead of her ninth. "_C'est un
petit garcon de l'Armistice_" with a happy blush.

"Ah, let us hope that he will always be a little child of peace." But in
another moment she is playing with him, chucking him under the chin.
"_Tiens, mon coco! Viens, mon petit soldat_--you must grow up strong and
big, for you are another little soldier for France."

Little Vauchelles, far away in the hills of the fertile Oise, I think of
you. I hope I may again visit you. And I wonder. What ripples from the
seething capitals will stir the placid thoughts of your stouthearted
peasants? And will your broad-browed women wait with age-old resignation
for the next wave of war, or will they catch the echo that is rebounding
through all the valleys of the world and join their voices in the
swelling chord for brotherhood?

In your midst, where the three roads meet, still stands the image of
Christ on the Cross.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Where the Sabots Clatter Again
by Katherine Shortall

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WHERE THE SABOTS CLATTER AGAIN ***

***** This file should be named 13048.txt or 13048.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/3/0/4/13048/

This eBook was produced by Steven desJardins and Distributed
Proofreaders.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

