The Project Gutenberg eBook, Fun And Frolic, by Various, Edited by E. T.
Roe


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: Fun And Frolic

Author: Various

Release Date: February 29, 2004  [eBook #11374]

Language: English

Character set encoding: US-ASCII


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FUN AND FROLIC***


E-text prepared by The Internet Archive Children's Library, Christine
Gehring, Garrett Alley, and the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed
Proofreading Team



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 11374-h.htm or 11374-h.zip:
      (http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/1/1/3/7/11374/11374-h/11374-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/1/1/3/7/11374/11374-h.zip)





FUN AND FROLIC

PROFUSELY ILLUSTRATED.

EDITED BY E. T. ROE






[Illustration]

[Illustration]




GRANDMOTHER'S CHAIR.


    Grandmother sits in her easy chair
    Softly humming some old-time air;
    And as she sings, her needles keep pace
    With the smiles that flit o'er her wrinkled face;
    While the fire-light flickers, and fades away,
    And comes again like the breaking day.

    From morning till evening she knits and sings,
    While ever the pendulum tireless swings
    The moments around, with its tick and stroke,
    Nor hastes for the festal, nor lags for the yoke.
    And grandmother never repines at her fate
    Of being the last at the "Crystal Gate."

    Husband, and daughters, and sons all there,
    Wearing the "crown and the garments fair"
    Singing the songs that will never tire,
    And swelling the chorus of heaven's choir;
    But patiently, hopefully, bides the time
    That shall bring her at last to a fairer clime.

    Grandmother's chair will be vacant soon,
    For the rays of life slant far past noon;
    But yonder in heaven she'll sing again,
    Joining the evermore glad refrain,
    Wearing the "crown" and the "garments fair,"
    While we mournfully stand by her vacant chair.




HOW GRANDMA SURPRISED ELSIE.


Elsie Dean was four years old when she was invited to her first party.
It was Dollie Blossom's fifth birthday, and Dollie's mamma had arranged
for a little party in honor of the event. Of course Elsie's mamma was
perfectly willing she should go to the party, for the Blossoms were very
nice people, and Mrs. Dean was always glad for an occasion of enjoyment
for her little daughter. But alas, on the day before the party was to
occur, Elsie went to a picnic, and was so unfortunate as to tear her
dress--the only one she had which her mamma thought was suitable for her
to wear to the party. "I am afraid you cannot go to the party, my dear,
for now you have nothing fit to wear," said Mrs. Dean to Elsie. The
little girl's eyes filled with tears, and her Grandmamma seemed to feel
almost as bad about it as Elsie. But she did not wish to make the little
girl feel any worse over her disappointment, so she made light of it and
told her that there would probably be another birthday party soon, and
by that time she would surely have a suitable dress to wear. Elsie was
finally comforted, and went to bed in good spirits after kissing mamma
and grandmamma good night.

What was Elsie's surprise next morning, to find that her picnic dress
had been mended "good as new." She did not need to ask who did it, for
she felt certain that it was grandmamma's work, and so it proved.
Grandmamma remembered that she herself was a little girl once, and that
blessed memory brought her into close sympathy with the grief and joy of
her little granddaughter. And so Elsie, thanks to her grandmamma's tact
and tenderness, went to Dolly Blossom's birthday party.

[Illustration: GRANDMAMMA WONDERS IF SHE CAN'T MEND IT.]




GOING TO BED.


        The evening is coming,
          The Sun sinks to rest;
        The rooks are all flying
          Straight home to their nest.
    "Caw!" says the rook, as he flies overhead:
    It's time little people were going to bed!

        The flowers are closing,
          The daisy's asleep;
        The primrose is buried
          In slumber so deep.
    Shut up for the night is the pimpernel red:
    It's time little people were going to bed!

        The butterfly, drowsy,
          Has folded its wing;
        The bees are returning,
          No more the birds sing.
    Their labor is over, their nestlings are fed:
    It's time little people were going to bed!

        Here comes the pony,
          His work is all done;
        Down through the meadow
          He takes a good run;
    Up goes his heels, and down goes his head:
    It's time little people were going to bed!

        Good-night, little people,
          Good-night and good-night;
        Sweet dreams to your eyelids,
          Till dawning of light;
    The evening has come, there's no more to be said:
    It's time little people were going to bed!

T. HOOD.

[Illustration: GOING TO BED.]




THE CAT AND THE PARROT.


A lady who lived in New York City owned a pet parrot and a large house
cat. The parrot was just as full of mischief as could be. One day the
cat and parrot had a quarrel. I think the cat had upset Polly's food, or
something of that kind. However, they seemed all right again. An hour or
so after Polly was on her stand, she called out in a tone of extreme
affection, "Pussy! Pussy! come here, Pussy." Pussy went and looked up
innocently enough; Polly with her beak seized her tin of food and tipped
its contents all over the cat, and then chuckled as poor Puss ran away
half frightened to death.




BABY.


    Who is it coos just like a dove?
    Who is it that we dearly love--
    The brightest blessing from above?
          Our baby.

    While silent watch the angels keep,
    Who smiles so sweetly in his sleep,
    And oft displays his dimples deep.
          Our baby.

[Illustration: POLLY PLAYING OFF A TRICK ON PUSS.]




THE CAPTAIN'S DAUGHTER.


    We were crowded in the cabin,
      Not a soul would dare to sleep,--
    It was midnight on the waters,
    And a storm was on the deep.

    'Tis a fearful thing in winter
      To be shattered by the blast,
    And to hear the rattling trumpet
      Thunder, "Cut away the mast!"

    So we shuddered there in silence,--
      For the stoutest held his breath,
    While the hungry sea was roaring,
      And the breakers talked with Death.

    And as thus we sat in darkness,
      Each one busy with his prayers,
    "We are lost!" the Captain shouted,
      As he staggered down the stairs.

    But his little daughter whispered,
      As she took his icy hand,
    "Isn't God upon the ocean,
      Just the same as on the land?"

    Then we kissed the little maiden,
    And we spoke in better cheer,
    And we anchored safe in harbor
      When the morn was smiling clear.

J. T. FIELDS

[Illustration: SHIPWRECK ON THE AUCKLAND ISLANDS.]




FUN FOR THE KITTENS.


    Our cat she had five little ones,
      As every person knew;
    Their names were "Flossie," "Snowball," "Smut,"
      With "Kit," and little "Mew."

    One day on foraging intent,
      She leaped upon a cage,
    But after sniffing round a while
      Vexed thoughts her mind engage.

    "How very sad it is," thought she,
      "That every single linnet
    Has been removed before we came!
      The cage has nothing in it!

    "However, I have dined to-day,
      So now for quiet rest;
    My children, you may go and play,
      For frolic suits you best."

    With folded paws she laid her down,
      And meditative look,
    While every wicked little cat
      Its own diversion took.

    Said Snowball to his brother Kit,
      "Get out of this--now do;
    For Smut and I, we live in here,
      And there's no room for you!

    "And Smut feels rather sick to-day,
      He told me so just now;
    So off you go, again I say,
      Or there will be a row.

    "And Kit, just leave that stick alone;
      Come, drop it now at once;
    Of all the cats I ever knew
      You are the greatest dunce."

    Cried little Smut, "Quick, Snowball, quick!
      Or you will be too late;
    Here's sister Flossie pushing in;
      Come quick, and shut the gate."

    "How strange it seems, when you and I,
      Dear Snowball, are so good,
    That other cats should be so pert,
      Inquisitive and rude!"

    Said mother Puss, "This summer day
      I thought to lie at rest,
    While my dear children romp and play,
      Which seems to suit them best.

    "But really, how they snarl and fight,
      And kick, and growl, and riot!
    Ah, well! when they are old like me
      They'll like a little quiet."

[Illustration: FUN FOR THE KITTENS.]




TOMMY GREEN AND TOMMY RED.


Tommy Green was a little boy only eight years old when his parents sent
him to "boarding school," where he was thrown into the company of boys
older than himself. It is strange how most all boys enjoy teasing those
who are younger than themselves.

At Tommy's boarding school all the boys slept in one large room, on cots
conveniently arranged. Tommy was a heavy sleeper. One morning he awoke
with a strange feeling of stiffness about his face, and no sooner did he
sit up in bed than a laugh rang around the whole room.

"What are you laughing at?", he asked, but the boys only laughed the
harder at his confusion. At last one little boy named Frankie Jones
cried out "Tommy, it's your face."

Tommy rushed to a looking-glass, and found on his forehead and on each
cheek an enormous dab of red paint.

"Halloo, Green?" shouted one of the boys, "You're red now, ain't you?"

Tommy was greatly teased for a while, but kept his temper, and it was
not very long before he was joining with his school-mates to tease some
other small boy in a similar manner.

Such things are provoking, but it is best to treat them good-naturedly,
as Tommy did, and not lose one's temper.

[Illustration: PAINTING TOMMY'S FACE.]




FOND OF CATS.


Pussy has always been a favorite in the East, but the country where she
was held in the highest estimation, and treated with the greatest
respect, was Egypt.

The fondness of the Egyptians for their cats is shown in some of their
ancient paintings where the cat is frequently seen by the side of its
master whilst he entertains company. When a cat died the whole household
shaved off their eyebrows in token of mourning; and its body was sent to
the embalmers, and there made into a mummy, and afterwards buried, with
great lamentations, in the cat-sepulchre adjoining the town.

Heredotus, the Greek historian, who had himself spent some time in
Egypt, and witnessed the customs of the natives, tells us that when a
house caught fire the only care of the Egyptians was to save the lives
of the cats, utterly regardless of the destruction of their property.

Bubastis was the sacred city of cats, and there was the temple of the
goddess Pasht, whose statue appeared with the head of a cat. There the
cats reveled in luxury, for they were looked upon as living
representatives of the divinity. The punishment for killing any sacred
animal was death; but woe to the luckless person who even accidentally
killed a cat? for he was set upon by the infuriated people, and torn to
pieces without trial.

[Illustration: EGYPTIAN SAVING HIS CAT.]




THE CAT'S QUESTIONS.


    Dozing, and dozing, and dozing!
      Pleasant enough,
    Dreaming of sweet cream and mouse-meat.
      Delicate stuff!

    Of raids on the pantry and hen-coop,
      Or light, stealthy tread
    Of cat gossips, meeting by moonlight
      On ridge-pole or shed.

    Waked by a somersault, whirling,
      Whirling from cushion to floor;
    Waked from a wild rush of safety
      From window to door.

    Waking two hands that first smooth us,
     And then pull our tails;
    Punished with slaps when we show them
      The length of our nails!
    These big mortal tyrants even grudge us
      A place on the mat.
    Do they think we enjoy for our music
      Staccatos of "scat?"
    What in the world were we made for?
      Man, do you know?
    By you to be petted, tormented?
      Are _you_ friend or foe?
    To be treated now, just as you treat us,
      The question is pat,
    To take just our chances in living,
      Would _you_ be a cat?

_LUCY LARCOM_.

[Illustration: "ARE YOU FRIEND OR FOE?"]




"SCRAMBLE."


Doctor Schroeder was a quaint old German physician, who lived in a fine
old-fashioned house near a public play-ground. Connected with the
doctor's premises was an extensive peach orchard, and, sad to say,
naughty boys would sometimes climb over the orchard wall and pilfer his
peaches. To guard against this practice the doctor had the top of his
wall adorned with a row of very ugly iron spikes. Not far from Doctor
Schroeder's place lived a family known as "the Jones's". One member of
the family was a small boy nicknamed "Scramble;" so named, I presume,
from the fact that he was all the time scrambling over other people's
fences and into other people's fruit trees.

One day "Scramble" got caught on the spikes on top of Doctor Schroeder's
wall, and in spite of all his efforts to get loose, the spikes held him
fast until he was discovered and taken down by the quaint old doctor,
almost frightened out of his wits. That is, "Scramble" was frightened,
not the doctor, But to "Scramble's" great surprise and greater relief,
the old German did not punish him with the terrible cane he held in his
hand, but took him into the orchard and told him to take his pick of the
finest fruit on the place.

"Scramble" felt greatly abashed over this unexpected kind treatment, and
never again had the heart to pilfer peaches from old Doctor Schroeder.

[Illustration: "SCRAMBLE" ON THE TOP OF THE WALL.]




CLEVER GOATS.


Goats sometimes do very clever tricks, which almost prove them to be
capable of reasoning.

A goat and her kids frequented a square in which I once lived, and were
often fed by the servants and myself. Now and again I heard a thumping
at the hall door, which arose from the buttings of the goat when the
food was not forthcoming, and the mother's example was followed by her
two little kids. After a while this grew monotonous, and no attention
was paid to their knocking! but one day the area bell--used by the
delivery men and callers generally, the wire of which passed by the side
of one of the railings--was sounded. The cook answered the bell, but no
one was there save the goat and kids, with their heads bent down towards
the kitchen window. It was at first thought that some mischievous boy
had rung the bell for them, but they were watched, and the old goat was
seen to hook one of her horns into the wire and pull it. This is too
much like reason to be ascribed to mere instinct.

[Illustration: GOATS KNOCKING AT THE DOOR.]




KING LEAR.


Poor old King Lear, who in ancient times reigned in Britain, having in
his old age turned over all his possessions to his two older daughters,
Goneril and Regan, who professed to love him more than did their younger
sister Cordelia, was by them cruelly deprived of his crown and turned
out of his palace. None dared to give him shelter for fear of the anger
of the two wicked queens. And though he had become blind, he was forced
to wander over the land he once ruled, his only guide being an old and
faithful servant. At last, in his misery and despair, he thought he
would go to his youngest daughter, who had become queen of France, and
see if she would take pity on him. So he crossed over to France. When
Cordelia heard of her father's woeful plight, and of her sisters'
cruelty to him, she wept for sorrow, and at once sent him everything
needful for his comfort. She and her husband then set out to meet him,
surrounded by their soldiers and followers, and brought him in great
state to the palace, and honored him as a king in their land.

The King of France soon gathered an army and invaded Britain. The two
ungrateful daughters and their husbands were killed, King Lear was
restored to his throne, and when he died Cordelia succeeded him in the
kingdom.

[Illustration: KING LEAR.]




THE BRITISH MASTIFFS.


When the Romans invaded Britain they found that the natives had a breed
of large fierce dogs, who would fight bravely for their masters; these
animals they called _pugnaces_, or fighting dogs, and from them the
modern English mastiff is descended.

Soon after the conquest of the island some of the British mastiffs were
sent to Rome, where their sagacity, strength and courage excited so much
admiration, that an imperial officer was appointed to reside in Britain
for the express purpose of selecting the finest dogs to fight with other
animals for the amusement of the vast crowds assembled in the Colosseum.
The strongest dogs previously known to the Romans were the Molossian
dogs of Epirus, which in their native country were trained by their
masters to fight in battle, but when they were matched against the
British mastiffs they were thoroughly beaten. The dogs of Britain were
then pitted against various wild beasts; and it was said that three of
them were a match for a bear and four for a lion. And so famous were
they for courage, that the Gauls imported them, and trained them for
war, and used them in their battles.

The British mastiff is no longer trained to fight in battle, but his
character for sagacity and fidelity as well as courage, is as high as it
was in the days of the Romans.

[Illustration: ANCIENT BRITISH SOLDIER AND MASTIFF.]




ON THE LAKES IN A STORM.


Some minutes before sunrise we went aboard our boat and took our places
for a long pull up the lakes. There were two sets of rowlocks, with oars
to match. Fred took one pair and Farr the other. Spot lay down on Farr's
coat behind his master. I took the stern seat and steering oar. Scott
had the bow seat and a paddle.

"All ready!" cried Fred, cheerily. "Give way! one, two, three, and away
we go!"

By the time we were fairly out on the lake there was quite a "sea."

We made for Birch Island. The swells threw us about amazingly. There is
much strength and friskiness in these fresh-water surges. Those were
wild moments. Fred, Farr and Scott were pulling with might and main. The
spray flew over us; the spatters drenched us. I expected every moment
that we should be swamped. And as we drew near the island our case
seemed not much improved. The waves broke against it fiercely.

"It won't do to let her run on there!" exclaimed Farr. "It will swamp
her."

"Yes," said Fred; "but it is not deep water. Sit still and pull till I
give the word, then jump out, everybody, and ease her ashore.

"Now for it! Over with you!" he shouted, a moment afterwards.

We leaped out, and carried the boat by main strength high upon the
land.

[Illustration: "NOW FOR IT! OVER WITH YOU!"]




FRITZ.


Fritz is a beautiful light-blue grey cat. He is the especial pet of his
master's little daughter, and therefore has many privileges about the
house not usually accorded to cats. Among these special privileges is
that of having his food in the dining-room. Fritz has many
peculiarities, the chief being that he thinks that he is covering up the
food that remains after he has eaten all he wishes, a habit of wild cats
which is well known.

He stands over the plate which contains the remains of his repast and
scratches perfectly imaginary dust or mould over it.

This he does all round the plate, and after a curious look at it to see
that it is all right, and it _is_ covered up, he walks leisurely away.
How strange it is that these traces of a wild state are so often to be
seen in animals which have been domesticated for long generations! Fritz
had no need to cover up his food, even if the dirt or mould were there
for the purpose, for he is sure of getting plenty more when he wants it.
It was simply from the force of habit, a habit not his own, but his
ancestors, that he went through the motions.

What a forcible illustration of the power of habit!

[Illustration: FRITZ COVERING UP HIS FOOD.]




NAUGHTY WILLIE.


    Willie got punished at school to-day!
      What did he do?
    Why, he drew on his slate, in a comical way,
    Pictures of horses and oxen, and they
    Seemed to be dancing a real Irish jig!
    Yes, and he, too, had a little wee pig
    Down in the corner, as cute as could be;
    All of us laughed such a picture to see!

    That was the morning before recess,
    When he threw paper balls at sly little Bess;
    And one hit her plump on her fat little nose,
    And made us all laugh, as you may well suppose;
    And he pulled some one's hair as they went out to spell,
    But who cried out nobody would tell.

    And then, let me see; why he stepped on my toes,
    And balanced his book on the tip of his nose
    When the teacher wasn't looking, and then, O, dear me,
    He made some whiskers as black as could be
    With the cork of the ink-bottle rubbed on his cheek,
    And we all laughed till we hardly could speak.

    The teacher caught him, and punished him well;
    Not half the words that were his could he spell;
    And in the arithmetic he had to guess
    Half of the answers and wished they were less.
    All he has gained by his actions to-day,
    Is a black mark and his ill-timed play.

[Illustration: NAUGHTY WILLIE.]




NED BENTLY'S TEMPTATION.


When Ned Bently was a boy of about fifteen years of age he lost both of
his parents by yellow fever, in New Orleans. The only remaining relative
he had was a bachelor uncle, living in the mining regions of California.
Ned worked his way on board a ship, as a sailor boy, to San Francisco,
and finally arrived at the diggings where his uncle was engaged in
mining. In those early days of California mine digging the miners were
generally a very rough class of men. So it happened that soon after
Ned's arrival a great gruff "digger" offered to treat Ned to a drink of
liquor, and became very angry because he refused to touch it.

Ned scarcely shut his eyes all that night, for he was dreadfully afraid
that the miners might yet force him to drink of that which he had been
taught was certain ruin to body and soul. But to Ned's great surprise
and joy, next morning the very man who the night before had offered to
treat him took a bold stand in his defense against the other miners'
attempts to force him to drink.

"The lad's about right," said the gruff old digger. "If he can live out
here without drinkin' liquor, he'll be able to buy and sell the whole of
ye by'n'by." And so it proved, for Ned held fast to his resolution not
to drink, and became one of the wealthiest mine owners in California.

[Illustration: NED REFUSING TO DRINK WITH THE MINERS.]




"HODGE."


Many have a dislike to cats; but when boys say they hate cats, it is to
be feared that they mostly do so that they may have an excuse for
hunting and ill-treating them. In some cases, however, there is a
natural antipathy which those who possess it cannot help, though it
seems very foolish and unreasonable.

James Boswell tells us that he was "unluckily one of those who have an
antipathy to a cat," so that he was uneasy when in a room with one. It
certainly was rather unlucky, for he was writing the life of Dr.
Johnson, and wishing to be as much in his company as possible was
frequently at his house. Now the Doctor had a favorite tomcat whom he
called "Hodge," and Boswell relates how he "suffered from the presence
of this same Hodge."

He says, "I recollect him one day scrambling up Dr. Johnson's breast,
apparently with much satisfaction, while my friend, smiling and half
whistling, rubbed down his back and pulled him by the tail, and when I
observed that he was a fine cat, saying, 'Why, yes, Sir, but I have had
cats whom I liked better than this,' and then, as if perceiving Hodge to
be out of countenance, he added! 'But he's a very fine cat; a very fine
cat, indeed.'"

Hodge was well taken care of, and did not have to catch rats for a
living, for the Doctor was in the habit of treating him to oysters.

[Illustration: DR. JOHNSON AND HIS CAT.]




APRIL FOOL.


Most small boys are fond of April-fooling people. How often on the first
day of April have we seen the small boy wrapping up a piece of wood or
brick in the shape of a parcel bought at the store, carelessly place it
on the sidewalk as if dropped by a passer-by, and then hide himself near
by and wait for some one to be "fooled" by it.

Dick and Frank Slemmons, one April-fool's day, concluded to get up an
April-fool on a grander scale than usual. They procured an old pair of
pants, a shirt, pair of boots, gloves, a dunce's cap, and a "false-face"
or mask. They took these articles to their father's barn, and by
stuffing them with straw and putting a few extra touches of paint on the
mask, they made a hideous looking Guy. To the back of this figure, near
the shoulders, the boys fastened a string, and when it began to grow
dark they carried it out into the yard and placed it in a sitting
posture on the front fence, to fool people who were passing by. Holding
to the string they hid themselves behind the fence intending when any
one passed to let the figure fall forward as if it were about to drop
from the fence. But they failed to fool anybody, for the first one to
come along was Mike, their father's hostler, who at once discovered the
boys, and, saying "Ah! see the little laddie-bucks over the fince!" he
grabbed the guy and took it along with him.

So the boys themselves were the only ones April fooled.

[Illustration]




IN A STORM ON THE SEA.


Little David Loomis, only eight years old, was permitted by his father,
Captain Loomis, to accompany him on a whaling expedition. While out at
sea the body of a dead whale was discovered at some distance from the
boat, floating in the water. Several of the crew manned one of the
smaller boats and rowed away over the glassy sea to secure the carcase.
David was allowed to go with them. Before the boat reached the floating
whale, however, a fearful squall suddenly arose; the wind screamed and
whistled round their little boat; the waves, lashed to sudden fury,
hissed and foamed, breaking over them like a deluge, whilst a terrible
peel of thunder broke right overhead. David was scared almost out of his
senses. He had never before seen such a storm. But he sat still, as one
of the crew had told him to do, looking out, oh! how eagerly, for some
signs of his father's vessel. Nothing was to be seen, however, but a
wild waste of heaving, tumbling billows, over which the boat seemed
actually to fly. Suddenly the clouds lifted, the wind ceased, and all
was as calm as before the storm. Nothing was to be seen of the dead
whale, and the crew was content to let it float where it would, while
they rowed in search of their vessel. Ere long they were safe and sound
on board with Captain Loomis. David could not help repeating from a poem
he had recited at school, the words: "Isn't God upon the ocean, just the
same as on the land?"

[Illustration: IN A STORM ON THE SEA.]




THE JAGUAR.


The jaguar, or American tiger, as he is sometimes called, is a native of
South America. He is beautifully spotted with rings containing smaller
spots on a deeper ground tint. He is a ferocious and destructive beast,
inhabits the forests, and seeks his prey by watching, or by openly
seizing cattle or horses in the enclosures. His depredations among the
herds of horses which graze on the prairies of Paraguay are vast and
terrible. Swift as lightning he darts upon his prey, overthrows it by
weight, or breaks its neck by a blow of his paw. His strength is so
great, he can easily drag off a full-sized horse. He is an expert
climber, and the prints of his claws have been seen on the bark at the
top of trees fifty feet in height and without branches. He sometimes
feeds on monkeys, but they are generally too active for him; having the
power to swing themselves from branch to branch with wonderful
swiftness, they are soon beyond his reach. After horses, oxen and sheep
are his favorite prey, and his devastations among them are often very
extensive. On account of this, efforts are constantly made to destroy
him. He is hunted with dogs, which run him to bay, or force him to seek
safety in a tree, where he is kept till the approach of the hunters, who
shoot him, or disable him with their long spears.

[Illustration: THE JAGUAR WAITING FOR HIS PREY.]




MILITARY DOGS.


Big dogs, little dogs; black dogs, white dogs--all sizes and sorts of
dogs are now carefully trained for use in the military service of France
and Germany as messengers, scouts, and sentinels.

These "dog-children of the regiment" are not chosen from any special
breed of dogs, because that would at once cause then to be recognized,
and so become a target for the foe whenever seen.

These military dogs are chosen on account of the promise they give of
"individual merit," and their education is begun as early as possible.
All are trained to silence--a most difficult lesson, and only learnt by
long and patient teaching. In fact, it is at all times difficult to
insure obedience when music strickes up, for the training poodles,
fox-terriers, and collies are sorely tempted to give vocal
accompaniment. Dogs selected for this service are thoroughly children of
the regiment. They are never allowed to associate with civilians, or to
let any man wearing an unknown uniform approach them. They must not
attack strangers, but are to keep at a respectful distance from all
such. Thus their fidelity as letter-carriers is secured.

When on sentry duty they are taught to warn their human companions of
the approach of any strangers within three hundred yards. Each dog has
his regimental number on his collar.

[Illustration: DOG CHILDREN OF THE REGIMENT.]




TRUE TO HIS WORD.


At the conquest of Susa, Harmozan, a Persian prince, the satrap of
Ahwaz, was taken prisoner by the Arabs. When about to be taken before
Omar, the Commander of the Faithful, he arranged himself in his most
gorgeous apparel, wearing a crown on his head, and his embroidered silk
robe being confined by a splendid jeweled girdle. When his conductors
brought him to the mosque he saw Omar stretched on the ground, taking a
mid-day sleep. When he awoke he asked their business, and they replied,
"We bring you here the king of Ahwaz."

"Take hence the infidel," said Omar, averting his gaze. "Strip him of
his robes, and array him in the garb of El Islam."

This was done, and when Harmozan was again brought into the presence of
Omar he wore the striped garments of the Arabs. After conversing a while
he complained of being thirsty; but when a cup of water was brought he
expressed a fear that he might be killed while drinking it.

"Be of good courage," said Omar! "your life shall be safe till you have
drunk this water."

Harmozan instantly dashed the cup on the ground, claiming fulfillment of
the Caliphs word. Omar declared that this conduct deserved punishment as
deceitful, but out of regard for his word he pardoned the Persian, who
became a convert to the faith of El Islam.

[Illustration: "TAKE HENCE THE INFIDEL," SAID OMAR]




HUNTING A LION.


Some hunters near the Cape of Good Hope went in search of a lion which
had carried off a number of cattle from the neighborhood.

They discovered him in a thicket or jungle, and at once proceeded to
pepper him with slugs and bullets. Regardless of the shower of balls the
lion bounded forward, and in an instant turned the chase upon them. All
took to their horses or their heels. One huge fellow, not nimble enough
to mount his horse in time, was left in the rear, and was speedily run
down by the rampant lion. He had the prudence to fling himself flat on
the ground and lie quiet as a log. The lion sniffed at him, scratched
him with his paw, and then quietly sat down upon his body. His routed
companions, collecting in a band, took courage at length to face about;
and, seeing the lion on the prostrate body of the hunter, they imagined
that their comrade was killed, and began to concert measures for
avenging him. After a short pause, however, the lion resigned of his own
accord his seat of triumph, relieved his panting capture, and retreated
towards the mountains. The party, on coming up, found their friend
shaking his ears, unharmed, except what he had suffered from a very
ungentlemanly piece of conduct on the part of the lion.

[Illustration: THE LION SITS DOWN ON THE HUNTER.]




PURSUED BY INDIANS.


Two young men who had been attached to an exploring party, out West, but
had unwisely strayed away from their companions, were leisurely riding
along the prairie, trying to track the footsteps of their friends, when
they saw on the brow of a hill in their rear about a dozen Indian
warriors, who were rapidly approaching them. There was not a moment to
lose. The white men were unarmed, save for their hunting-knives, while
the lances of the red men gleamed in the light of the afternoon sun.
Putting spurs to their horses the two young men tried to escape by
flight, but the derisive cries of the enemy showed that the distance was
rapidly lessening between them. Nothing could have saved them had it not
been that, just at the most critical moment, they reached a "windrow," a
strip of ground upon which a storm had hurled down the trunks of trees
in wild confusion. Hastily abandoning their horses to their fate, the
two friends got in among the thick fallen timber, where they concealed
themselves, and listened breathlessly while the Indians with shouts
pursued, and attempted to capture the coveted animals. But they did not
succeed. A cloud of dust heralded the approach of a party of men, who
with shouts and cries galloped into the midst of them.

It was the exploring party, whose opportune appearance saved their
companions' lives.

[Illustration: PURSUED BY NORTH AMERICAN INDIANS.]




THE TRUANT'S SOLILOQUY


    My schoolmates all are blessed to-day,
      Their lessons conning o'er;
    O, how I wish that I were now
      Within that school-room door!

    My teacher sits beside her desk,
      With a smile upon her face,
    Until she looks around the room,
      And sees my vacant place.

    My heart is aching while I walk
      Along the mountain glade;
    I love the trees, the rippling stream,
      But sigh that I have strayed.

    O, there's no joy in the hours of play,
      If snatched from the study-time;
    No music in the wild-bird's song,
      While I hear the school-bell chime.

    O, then, I'll seek my school again,
      My teacher's rules obey,
    Nor wander, as a truant boy,
      And waste another day.

[Illustration: "ALONG THE MOUNTAIN GLADE"]




A QUEER FISH.


Little May's father is a fisherman. One day he brought home the funniest
fish May ever saw. She was a little bit frightened and didn't know
whether to laugh or cry. Her papa took her up in his lap, put an arm
around her waist and held her fast with one hand while he kept a tight
hold on the fish with the other.

"See, May," he said, "what a queer fish this is. Would you think it
followed the same kind of business that papa does for a living?"

"Oh, papa!" said May; "that horrid thing a fisherman?--surely you are
joking."

"No, my daughter," said the fisherman, "it is no joke. With that queer
looking rod and line fastened to its nose it angles for other fishes. It
hides amongst the sea-weed at the bottom of the sea, and the fleshy
shreds attached to its nose, floating about in the water, act as natural
bait, and attract the unwary little fishes in its neighborhood, but the
instant one of them makes a bite at the tempting morsel it is whisked
away, and the poor fish is caught in the huge mouth of the fisherman
fish, and crushed up by its sharp teeth."

"Oh, papa!" said May, "what horrid big eyes it has; what a huge mouth,
and such awfully sharp teeth! Ugh! Put it down, please, papa, for I
really believe I am going to be frightened."

The fisherman laughed heartily, and threw the queer fish into the
basket.

[Illustration: A QUEER FISH.]




A PROUD MONARCH.


Theodore, Emperor of Abyssinia, was raised to the throne from a very
humble position in life. He was one of the proudest of monarchs, was
styled "King of Kings," and boasted a descent from King Solomon and the
Queen of Sheba; a fiction devised to flatter the vanity of the royal
house of Ethiopia.

When this mighty emperor gave an audience he was surrounded by several
large and fierce-looking lions, and he made a great display of his
command over the savage creatures; but, notwithstanding their ferocious
aspect, the animals were said to be in reality as tame as dogs. Anyway,
they must have made a timid ambassador feel rather nervous when first
introduced to the royal presence.

The Abyssinians are very vain, and King Theodore thought himself greater
than all the sovereigns in the world, and this led to his fall. Thinking
he was not treated with sufficient respect by the British envoy and
other Europeans, he imprisoned them all. In 1867 an expedition was
fitted out under the command of General Napier. After encountering great
difficulties on the march, the British troops stormed and took
possession of Magdala without losing a single man; and the Emperor
Theodore, seeing that all was lost, slew himself to avoid falling into
the hands of the enemy. The captives were liberated, and for his
services in this campaign General Napier received the title of Lord
Napier of Magdala.

[Illustration: A PROUD MONARCH]




BABY'S ANSWERS.


    "Where did you come from, baby dear?"
    "Out of the every-where into the here."
    "Where did you get your eyes so blue?"
    "Out of the sky as I came through."

    "What makes the light in them sparkle and spin?"
    "Some of the starry spikes left in."
    "Where did you get that little tear?"
    "I found it waiting when I got here."

    "What makes your forehead so smooth and high?"
    "A soft hand stroked it as I went by."
    "What makes your cheek like a warm white rose?"
    "Something better than any one knows."

    "Whence that three-cornered smile of bliss?"
    "Three angels gave me at once a kiss."
    "Where did you get that pearly ear?"
    "God spoke, and it came out to hear."

    "Where did you get those arms and hands?"
    "Love made itself into hooks and bands."
    "Feet, whence did you come, you darling things?"
    "From the same body as the cherubs' wings."

    "How did they all just come to be you?"
    "God thought about me, and so I grew."
    "But how did you come to us, my dear?"
    "God thought of you, and so I am here."

GEORGE MACDONALD.

[Illustration: "WHERE DID YOU COME FROM?"]




DEAR LITTLE BROWN-EYED BESS.

A True Experience of Child-life.


    I was working in my garden one day in the end of June,
    The sun shone high in the clear blue sky, and the clock had just
        struck noon;
    I mused o'er my earliest childhood--my earliest friends, and lo,
    There rose up the picture of a child in the dear dim Long-ago:
    She holds in her arms a puppy, and smilingly shows it to me,
    Her cheeks they are rosy and chubby, all dimpled with baby glee;
    Her hair is dark and wavy, her brown eyes full of fun,
    And she wears a blue straw bonnet to shelter from the sun.

    She gathers daisies and kingcups till her pockets are more than
        full,
    And dreams of the far-away city where she soon must go to school;
    Her home it is rustic and lonely in the land of the river Ness,
    But she loves her rural dwelling, does dear little brown-eyed Bess.
    One time--ah! how well I remember, it seems like yesterday,
    Dear Bessie came to visit me, just nine years past last May:
    Beneath the hawthorn blossoms, hearts full of childish bliss,
    We vowed eternal friendship, and sealed it with a kiss;
    And I plucked a bright pink rosebud to fasten in her dress--
    She was six years old that summer, was dear little brown-eyed Bess.

    I remember very little of all she said to me,
    But I know we loved each other with childish love and free;
    I remember romping gaily around some little ricks,
    And fondly giving Bessie a tiny box of bricks;
    I remember our long, long parting one autumn afternoon,
    And Bessie softly whispering, "Come back and see me soon."
    But alas! some wicked fairy was present with us then,
    For during the days of childhood we never met again.

    Six years went by, and I happened to look at my toys one day.
    When I came across a wooden horse with which I used to play,
    A little wooden pony I found in the old toy "press,"
    That I once had got in a present from dear little brown-eyed Bess
    'Mongst the flowers I was dreaming and thinking--Was I ever to see
        her more?
    When roused by a sound I looked and saw a carriage before the door
    I ran right out of the garden and up the wooden stair,
    Till I came to my own pink bedroom where I quickly smoothed my hair;
    At my heart came a rush of rapture as I hastened to brush my dress
    For who was down in the parlor? 'Twas dear little brown-eyed Bess.

    Once more does our friendship flourish like the flowers in the
        garden-bed,
    And a tall young stately maiden is in little Bessie's stead.
    When I look at this stately maiden I think of the bright pink moss,
    I think of a foaming brooklet with a bridge of stones across;
    I think of a waste of heather, a collie pup, and a cat,
    In the arms of a rosy baby with a blue straw sun shade hat.
    When I look at this stately maiden I cannot a smile suppress.
    While I bless in my heart the good old times when I knew her
        as little Bess.

JEANIE P. H. SIMPSON

[Illustration: DEAR LITTLE BROWN-EYED BESS.]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FUN AND FROLIC***


******* This file should be named 11374.txt or 11374.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.net/1/1/3/7/11374


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***
